ALSO BY SEAMUS HEANEY 


POETRY 
Death of a Naturalist B E Q W U L F 
Door into the Dark 
Wintering Out 
North 
PE A NEW VERSE TRANSLATION 
Poems 1965-1975 
Sweeney Astray: A Version from the Irish 
Station Island 
The Haw Lantern SEAMUS HEANEY 
Selected Poems 1966—1987 
Seeing Things 
Sweeney's Flight (with photographs by Rachel Giese) 
The Spirit Level 
Opened Ground: Selected Poems 1966-1996 


CRITICISM 
Preoccupations: Selected Prose 1968-1978 
The Government of the Tongue 
The Redress of Poetry 


PLAYS 
The Cure at Troy: A Version of Sophocles’ Philoctetes 


W. W. NORTON & COMPANY 


New York * London 


Copyright © 2000 by Seamus Heaney 
All rights reserved 
Printed in the United States of America 
Designed by Cynthia Krupat 
First bilingual edition 2000 published by arrangement with Farrar, Straus and Giroux 
First published as a Norton paperback 2001 


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Beowulf. English & English (Old English) 
Beowulf / [translated by] Seamus Heaney. — 1st ed. 
p. cm. 
Text in English and Old English. 
1. Heroes — Scandinavia — Poetry. 2. Epic poetry, English (Old). 
3. Monsters — Poetry. 4. Dragons —Poetry. I. Heaney, Seamus. 
PE1583.H43 1999 
8293 —dc21 99-23209 
ISBN 0-393-32097-9 pbk. 


W. W. Norton & Company, Inc. 
500 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10110 
www. wwnorton.com 


W. W. Norton & Company Ltd. 
Castle House, 75/76 Wells Street, London WIT 3QT 


The Old English text of the poem is based on Beowulf, with the 
Finnesburg Fragment, edited by C. L. Wrenn and W. F. Bolton 
(University of Exeter Press, 1988), and is printed here by kind 
permission of W. F. Bolton and the University of Exeter Press. 


In memory of Ted Hughes 


Contents 


Introduction 
page ix 


A Note on Names by Alfred David 
page xxxi 


BEOWULF 


page 2 
Family Trees 
page 217 


Acknowledgements 
page 219 


Introduction 


And now this is ‘an inheritance’ — 
Upright, rudimentary, unshiftably planked 
In the long ago, yet willable forward 


Again and again and again. 


BEOWULF: THE POEM 

The poem called Beowulf was composed sometime between the 
middle of the seventh and the end of the tenth century of the first 
millennium, in the language that is to-day called Anglo-Saxon or 
Old English. It is a heroic narrative, more than three thousand 
lines long, concerning the deeds of a Scandinavian prince, also 
called Beowulf, and it stands as one of the foundation works of 
poetry in English. The fact that the English language has changed 
so much in the last thousand years means, however, that the 
poem is now generally read in translation and mostly in English 
courses at schools and universities. This has contributed to the 
impression that it was written (as Osip Mandelstam said of The 
Divine Comedy) “on official paper,” which is unfortunate, since 
what we are dealing with is a work of the greatest imaginative 
vitality, a masterpiece where the structuring of the tale is as elab- 
orate as the beautiful contrivances of its language. Its narrative 
elements may belong to a previous age but as a work of art it 
lives in its own continuous present, equal to our knowledge of 
reality in the present time. 

The poem was written in England but the events it describes 
are set in Scandinavia, in a “once upon a time” that is partly his- 
torical. Its hero, Beowulf, is the biggest presence among the war- 
riors in the land of the Geats, a territory situated in what is now 
southern Sweden, and early in the poem Beowulf crosses the sea 
to the land of the Danes in order to clear their country of a man- 


x 


eating monster called Grendel. From this expedition (which in- 
volves him in a second contest with Grendel’s mother) he returns 
in triumph and eventually rules for fifty years as king of his 
homeland. Then a dragon begins to terrorize the countryside and 
Beowulf must confront it. In a final climactic encounter, he does 
manage to slay the dragon, but he also meets his own death and 
enters the legends of his people as a warrior of high renown. 

We know about the poem more or less by chance because it ex- 
ists in one manuscript only. This unique copy (now in the British 
Library) barely survived a fire in the eighteenth century and was 
then transcribed and titled, retranscribed and edited, translated 
and adapted, interpreted and reinterpreted, until it has become 
canonical. For decades it has been a set book on English sylla- 
buses at university level all over the world. The fact that many 
English departments require it to be studied in the original con- 
tinues to generate resistance, most notably at Oxford University, 
where the pros and cons of the inclusion of part of it as a com- 
pulsory element in the English course have been debated regu- 
larly in recent years. 

For generations of undergraduates, academic study of the 
poem was often just a matter of construing the meaning, getting 
a grip on the grammar and vocabulary of Anglo-Saxon, and be- 
ing able to recognize, translate, and comment upon random ex- 
tracts which were presented in the examinations. For generations 
of scholars too the interest had been textual and philological; 
then there developed a body of research into analogues and 
sources, a quest for stories and episodes in the folklore and leg- 
ends of the Nordic peoples which would parallel or foreshadow 
episodes in Beowulf. Scholars were also preoccupied with fixing 
the exact time and place of the poem’s composition, paying 
minute attention to linguistic, stylistic, and scribal details. More 
generally, they tried to establish the history and genealogy of the 
dynasties of Swedes and Geats and Danes to which the poet 
makes constant allusion; and they devoted themselves to a con- 
sideration of the world-view behind the poem, asking to what 


| Introduction 


extent (if at all) the newly Christian understanding of the world 
which operates in the poet's designing mind displaces him from 
his imaginative at-homeness in the world of his poem—a pagan 
Germanic society governed by a heroic code of honour, one 
where the attainment of a name for warrior-prowess among the 
living overwhelms any concern about the soul's destiny in the 
afterlife. 

However, when it comes to considering Beowulf as a work of 
literature, there is one publication that stands out. In 1936, the 
Oxford scholar and teacher J.R.R. Tolkien published an epoch- 
making paper entitled "Beowulf: The Monsters and the Critics" 
which took for granted the poem's integrity and distinction as a 
work of art and proceeded to show in what this integrity and dis- 
tinction inhered. He assumed that the poet had felt his way 
through the inherited material—the fabulous elements and the 
traditional accounts of an heroic past—and by a combination of 
creative intuition and conscious structuring had arrived at a 
unity of effect and a balanced order. He assumed, in other words, 
that the Beowulf poet was an imaginative writer rather than some 
kind of back-formation derived from nineteenth-century folklore 
and philology. Tolkien's brilliant literary treatment changed the 
way the poem was valued and initiated a new era—and new 
terms—of appreciation. 

It is impossible to attain a full understanding and estimate of 
Beowulf without recourse to this immense body of commentary 
and elucidation. Nevertheless, readers coming to the poem for 
the first time are likely to be as delighted as they are discomfited 
by the strangeness of the names and the immediate lack of 
known reference points. An English speaker new to The Iliad or 
The Odyssey or The Aeneid will probably at least have heard of 
Troy and Helen, or of Penelope and the Cyclops, or of Dido and 
the golden bough. These epics may be in Greek and Latin, yet the 
classical heritage has entered the cultural memory enshrined in 
English so thoroughly that their worlds are more familiar than 
that of the first native epic, even though it was composed cen- 


Introduction | 


xi 


xii 


turies after them. Achilles rings a bell, but not Scyld Scefing. 
Ithaca leads the mind in a certain direction, but not Heorot. The 
Sibyl of Cumae will stir certain associations, but not bad Queen 
Modthryth. First-time readers of Beowulf very quickly rediscover 
the meaning of the term "the dark ages," and it is in the hope of 
dispelling some of the puzzlement they are bound to feel that I 
have added the marginal glosses which appear in the following 
pages. 

Still, in spite of the sensation of being caught between a 
"shield-wall" of opaque references and a “word-hoard” that is 
old and strange, such readers are also bound to feel a certain 
"shock of the new." This is because the poem possesses a mythic 
potency. Like Shield Sheafson (as Scyld Scéfing is known in this 
translation), it arrives from somewhere beyond the known 
bourne of our experience, and having fulfilled its purpose (again 
like Shield), it passes once more into the beyond. In the interven- 
ing time, the poet conjures up a work as remote as Shield's fu- 
neral boat borne towards the horizon, as commanding as the 
horn-pronged gables of King Hrothgar's hall, as solid and daz- 
zling as Beowulf's funeral pyre that is set ablaze at the end. 
These opening and closing scenes retain a haunting presence in 
the mind; they are set pieces but they have the life-marking 
power of certain dreams. They are like the pillars of the gate of 
horn, through which wise dreams of true art can still be said to 
pass. 

What happens in between is what William Butler Yeats would 
have called a phantasmagoria. Three agons, three struggles in 
which the preternatural force-for-evil of the hero’s enemies 
comes springing at him in demonic shapes. Three encounters 
with what the critical literature and the textbook glossaries call 
"the monsters." In three archetypal sites of fear: the barricaded 
night-house, the infested underwater current, and the reptile- 
haunted rocks of a wilderness. If we think of the poem in this 
way, its place in world art becomes clearer and more secure. We 
can conceive of it re-presented and transformed in performance 


Introduction 


in a bunraku theatre in Japan, where the puppetry and the poetry 
are mutually supportive, a mixture of technicolour spectacle and 
ritual chant. Or we can equally envisage it as an animated car- 
toon (and there has been at least one shot at this already), full of 
mutating graphics and minatory stereophonics. We can avoid, at 
any rate, the slightly cardboard effect which the word "monster" 
tends to introduce, and give the poem a fresh chance to sweep 
"jn off the moors, down through the mist bands" of Anglo-Saxon 
England, forward into the global village of the third millennium. 

Nevertheless, the dream element and overall power to haunt 
come at a certain readerly price. The poem abounds in passages 
which will leave an unprepared audience bewildered. Just when 
the narrative seems ready to take another step ahead into the 
main Beowulf story, it sidesteps. For a moment it is as if we have 
been channel-surfed into another poem, and at two points in this 
translation I indicate that we are in fact participating in a poem- 
within-our-poem not only by the use of italics but by a slight 
quickening of pace and shortening of metrical rein. The passages 
occur in lines 883-914 and lines 1070-1158, and on each occasion 
a minstrel has begun to chant a poem as part of the celebration 
of Beowulf's achievement. In the former case, the minstrel ex- 
presses his praise by telling the story of Sigemund's victory over 
a dragon, which both parallels Beowulf's triumph over Grendel 
and prefigures his fatal encounter with the wyrm in his old age. 
In the latter—the most famous of what were once called the “di- 
gressions" in the poem, the one dealing with a fight between 
Danes and Frisians at the stronghold of Finn, the Frisian king— 
the song the minstrel sings has a less obvious bearing on the im- 
mediate situation of the hero, but its import is nevertheless 
central to both the historical and the imaginative world of the 
poem. 

The "Finnsburg episode" envelops us in a society that is at 
once honour-bound and blood-stained, presided over by the 
laws of the blood-feud, where the kin of a person slain are bound 
to exact a price for the death, either by slaying the killer or by re- 


Introduction | 


xiii 


xiv 


ceiving satisfaction in the form of wergild (the "man-price"), a 
legally fixed compensation. The claustrophobic and doom-laden 
atmosphere of this interlude gives the reader an intense intima- 
tion of what wyrd, or fate, meant not only to the characters in the 
Finn story but to those participating in the main action of Beowulf 
itself. All conceive of themselves as hooped within the great 
wheel of necessity, in thrall to a code of loyalty and bravery, 
bound to seek glory in the eye of the warrior world. The little na- 
tions are grouped around their lord, the greater nations spoil for 
war and menace the little ones, a lord dies, defencelessness en- 
sues, the enemy strikes, vengeance for the dead becomes an ethic 
for the living, bloodshed begets further bloodshed, the wheel 
turns, the generations tread and tread and tread. Which is what I 
meant above when I said that the import of the Finnsburg pas- 
sage is central to the historical and imaginative world of the 
poem as a whole. 

One way of reading Beowulf is to think of it as three agons in 
the hero’s life, but another way would be to regard it as a poem 
which contemplates the destinies of three peoples by tracing 
their interweaving histories in the story of the central character. 
First we meet the Danes—variously known as the Shieldings (af- 
ter Shield Sheafson, the founder of their line), the Ingwins, the 
Spear-Danes, the Bright-Danes, the West-Danes, and so on—a 
people in the full summer of their power, symbolized by the high 
hall built by King Hrothgar, one “meant to be a wonder of the 
world.” The threat to this gilded order comes from within, from 
marshes beyond the pale, from the bottom of the haunted mere 
where “Cain’s clan,” in the shape of Grendel and his troll-dam, 
trawl and scavenge and bide their time. But it also comes from 
without, from the Heathobards, for example, whom the Danes 
have defeated in battle and from whom they can therefore expect 
retaliatory war (see Il. 2020-69). 

Beowulf actually predicts this turn of events when he goes 
back to his own country after saving the Danes (for the time be- 
ing, at any rate) by staving off the two “reavers from hell.” In the 


| Introduction 


hall of his “ring-giver,” Hygelac, lord of the Geats, the hero dis- 
courses about his adventures in a securely fortified cliff-top en- 
closure. But this security is only temporary, for it is the destiny 
of the Geat people to be left lordless in the end. Hygelac’s al- 
liances eventually involve him in deadly war with the Swedish 
king, Ongentheow, and even though he does not personally 
deliver the fatal stroke (two of his thanes are responsible for 
this—see 11. 2484-89 and then the lengthier reprise of this inci- 
dent at Il. 2922-3003), he is known in the poem as “Ongen- 
theow's killer.” Hence it comes to pass that after the death of 
Beowulf, who eventually succeeds Hygelac, the Geats experience 
a great foreboding and the epic closes in a mood of sombre ex- 
pectation. A world is passing away, the Swedes and others are 
massing on the borders to attack, and there is no lord or hero to 
rally the defence. 

The Swedes, therefore, are the third nation whose history and 
destiny are woven into the narrative, and even though no part 
of the main action is set in their territory, they and their kings 
constantly stalk the horizon of dread within which the main pro- 
tagonists pursue their conflicts and allegiances. The Swedish di- 
mension gradually becomes an important element in the poem's 
emotional and imaginative geography, a geography which en- 
tails, it should be said, no very clear map-sense of the world, 
more an apprehension of menaced borders, of danger gathering 
beyond the mere and the marshes, of mearc-stapas "prowling the 
moors, huge marauders / from some other world." 

Within these phantasmal boundaries, each lord's hall is an ac- 
tual and a symbolic refuge. Here is heat and light, rank and cere- 
mony, human solidarity and culture; the duguó share the 
mead-benches with the geogod, the veterans with their tales of 
warrior kings and hero-saviours from the past rub shoulders 
with young braves—pegnas, eorlas, thanes, retainers—keen to 
win such renown in the future. The prospect of gaining a glori- 
ous name in the wael-raes, in the rush of battle-slaughter, the 
pride of defending one’s lord and bearing heroic witness to the 


Introduction | 


xv 


xvi 


integrity of the bond between him and his hall-companions—a 
bond sealed in the gléo and gidd of peace-time feasting and ring- 
giving—this is what gave drive and sanction to the Germanic 
warrior-culture enshrined in Beowulf. 

Heorot and Hygelac’s hall are the hubs of this value system 
upon which the poem’s action turns. But there is another, outer 
rim of value, a circumference of understanding within which the 
heroic world is occasionally viewed as from a distance and rec- 
ognized for what it is, an earlier state of consciousness and cul- 
ture, one which has not been altogether shed but which has now 
been comprehended as part of another pattern. And this circum- 
ference and pattern arise, of course, from the poet’s Christianity 
and from his perspective as an Englishman looking back at 
places and legends which his ancestors knew before they made 
their migration from continental Europe to their new home on 
the island of the Britons. As a consequence of his doctrinal certi- 
tude, which is as composed as it is ardent, the poet can view the 
story-time of his poem with a certain historical detachment and 
even censure the ways of those who lived in illo tempore: 


Sometimes at pagan shrines they vowed 
offerings to idols, swore oaths 

that the killer of souls might come to their aid 
and save the people. That was their way, 
their heathenish hope; deep in their hearts 
they remembered hell. (ll. 175-80) 


At the same time, as a result of his inherited vernacular culture 
and the imaginative sympathy which distinguishes him as an 
artist, the poet can lend the full weight of his rhetorical power to 
Beowulf as he utters the first principles of the northern warrior’s 
honour-code: 


It is always better 
to avenge dear ones than to indulge in mourning. 


Introduction 


For every one of us, living in this world 

means waiting for our end. Let whoever can 

win glory before death. When a warrior is gone, 

that will be his best and only bulwark. (Il. 1384-89) 


In an age when “the instability of the human subject” is con- 
stantly argued for if not presumed, there should be no problem 
with a poem which is woven from two such different psychic 
fabrics. In fact, Beowulf perfectly answers the early modern con- 
ception of a work of creative imagination as one in which con- 
flicting realities find accommodation within a new order; and 
this reconciliation occurs, it seems to me, most poignantly and 
most profoundly in the poem’s third section, once the dragon en- 
ters the picture and the hero in old age must gather his powers 
for the final climactic ordeal. From the moment Beowulf ad- 
vances under the crags, into the comfortless arena bounded by 
the rock-wall, the reader knows he is one of those “marked by 
fate.” The poetry is imbued with a strong intuition of wyrd hov- 
ering close, “unknowable but certain,” and yet, because it is 
imagined within a consciousness which has learned to expect 
that the soul will find an ultimate home “among the steadfast 
ones,” this primal human emotion has been transmuted into 
something less “zero at the bone,” more metaphysically tem- 
pered. 

A similar transposition from a plane of regard which is, as it 
were, helmeted and hall-bound to one which sees things in a 
slightly more heavenly light is discernible in the different ways 
the poet imagines gold. Gold is a constant element, gleaming 
solidly in underground vaults, on the breasts of queens or the 
arms and regalia of warriors on the mead-benches. It is loaded 
into boats as spoil, handed out in bent bars as hall gifts, buried in 
the earth as treasure, persisting underground as an affirmation of 
a people’s glorious past and an elegy for it. It pervades the ethos 
of the poem the way sex pervades consumer culture. And yet the 
bullion with which Waels’s son, Sigemund, weighs down the 


Introduction | 


xvii 


xviii 


hold after an earlier dragon-slaying triumph (in the old days, 
long before Beowulf's time) is a more trustworthy substance than 
that which is secured behind the walls of Beowulf's barrow. By 
the end of the poem, gold has suffered a radiation from the 
Christian vision. It is not that it yet equals riches in the medieval 
sense of worldly corruption, just that its status as the ore of all 
value has been put in doubt. It is Ine, transitory, passing from 
hand to hand, and its changed status is registered as a symptom 
of the changed world. Once the dragon is disturbed, the melan- 
choly and sense of displacement which pervade the last move- 
ment of the poem enter the hoard as a disabling and ominous 
light. And the dragon himself, as a genius of the older order, is 
bathed in this light, so that even as he begins to stir, the reader 
has a premonition that the days of his empery are numbered. 
Nevertheless, the dragon has a wonderful inevitability about 
him and a unique glamour. It is not that the other monsters are 
lacking in presence and aura; it is more that they remain, for all 
their power to terrorize, creatures of the physical world. Grendel 
comes alive in the reader's imagination as a kind of dog-breath 
in the dark, a fear of collision with some hard-boned and im- 
mensely strong android frame, a mixture of Caliban and hoplite. 
And while his mother too has a definite brute-bearing about her, 
a creature of slouch and lunge on land if seal-swift in the water, 
she nevertheless retains a certain non-strangeness. As antago- 
nists of a hero being tested, Grendel and his mother possess an 
appropriate head-on strength. The poet may need them as fig- 
ures who do the devil's work, but the poem needs them more as 
figures who call up and show off Beowulf's physical might and 
his superb gifts as a warrior. They are the right enemies for a 
young glory-hunter, instigators of the formal boast, worthy 
trophies to be carried back from the grim testing-ground— 
Grendel's arm is ripped off and nailed up, his head severed and 
paraded in Heorot. It is all consonant with the surge of youth 
and the compulsion to win fame "as wide as the wind's home, / 


Introduction 


as the sea around cliffs," utterly a manifestation of the Germanic 
heroic code. 

Enter then, fifty years later, the dragon. From his dry-stone 
vault, from a nest where he is heaped in coils around the body- 
heated gold. Once he is wakened, there is something glorious in 
the way he manifests himself, a Fourth of July effulgence fire- 
working its path across the night sky; and yet, because of the 
centuries he has spent dormant in the tumulus, there is a found- 
edness as well as a lambency about him. He is at once a stratum 
of the earth and a streamer in the air, no painted dragon but a fig- 
ure of real oneiric power, one that can easily survive the preju- 
dice which arises at the very mention of the word "dragon." 
Whether in medieval art or in modern Disney cartoons, the 
dragon can strike us as far less horrific than he is meant to be, but 
in the final movement of Beowulf, he lodges himself in the imagi- 
nation as wyrd rather than wyrm, more a destiny than a set of rep- 
tilian vertebrae. 

Grendel and his mother enter Beowulf's life from the outside, 
accidentally, challenges which in other circumstances he might 
not have taken up, enemies from whom he might have been dis- 
tracted or deflected. The dragon, on the other hand, is a given of 
his home ground, abiding in his underearth as in his understand- 
ing, waiting for the meeting, the watcher at the ford, the ques- 
tioner who sits so sly, the “lion-limb,” as Gerard Manley Hopkins 
might have called him, against whom Beowulf's body and soul 
must measure themselves. Dragon equals shadow-line, the 
psalmist's valley of the shadow of death, the embodiment of a 
knowledge deeply ingrained in the species which is the very 
knowledge of the price to be paid for physical and spiritual sur- 
vival. 

It has often been observed that all the scriptural references in 
Beowulf are to the Old Testament. The poet is more in sympathy 
with the tragic, waiting, unredeemed phase of things than with 
any transcendental promise. Beowulf's mood as he gets ready to 


Introduction 


xix 


xx 


fight the dragon—who could be read as a projection of Beowulf's 
own chthonic wisdom refined in the crucible of experience—re- 
calls the mood of other tragic heroes: Oedipus at Colonus, Lear at 
his "ripeness is all" extremity, Hamlet in the last illuminations of 


his “prophetic soul": 


no easy bargain 
would be made in that place by any man. 


The veteran king sat down on the cliff-top. 

He wished good luck to the Geats who had shared 

his hearth and his gold. He was sad at heart, 

unsettled yet ready, sensing his death. 

His fate hovered near, unknowable but certain. (Il. 2415-21) 


Here the poet attains a level of insight that approaches the vision- 
ary. The subjective and the inevitable are in perfect balance, what 
is solidly established is bathed in an element which is completely 
sixth-sensed, and indeed the whole slow-motion, constantly self- 
deferring approach to the hero’s death and funeral continues to 
be like this. Beowulf’s soul may not yet have fled “to its destined 
place among the steadfast ones,” but there is already a beyond- 
the-grave aspect to him, a revenant quality about his resoluteness. 
This is not just metrical narrative full of anthropological interest 
and typical heroic-age motifs; it is poetry of a high order, in which 
passages of great lyric intensity—such as the “Lay of the Last Sur- 
vivor" (Il. 2247-66) and, even more remarkably, the so-called “Fa- 
ther’s Lament” (ll. 2444-62)—rise like emanations from some 
fissure in the bedrock of the human capacity to endure: 


It was like the misery felt by an old man 
who has lived to see his son’s body 

swing on the gallows. He begins to keen 
and weep for his boy, watching the raven 
gloat where he hangs: he can be of no help. 


| Introduction 


The wisdom of age is worthless to him. 
Morning after morning, he wakes to remember 
that his child has gone; he has no interest 

in living on until another heir 

is born in the hall... 

Alone with his longing, he lies down on his bed 
and sings a lament; everything seems too large, 
the steadings and the fields. 


Such passages mark an ultimate stage in poetic attainment; they 
are the imaginative equivalent of Beowulf's spiritual state at the 
end, when he tells his men that "doom of battle will bear [their] 
lord away," in the same way that the sea-journeys so vividly de- 
scribed in lines 210-28 and 1903-24 are the equivalent of his ex- 
ultant prime. 

At these moments of lyric intensity, the keel of the poetry is 
deeply set in the element of sensation while the mind's lookout 
sways metrically and far-sightedly in the element of pure com- 
prehension. Which is to say that the elevation of Beowulf is al- 
ways, paradoxically, buoyantly down to earth. And nowhere is 
this more obviously and memorably the case than in the account 
of the hero's funeral with which the poem ends. Here the inex- 
orable and the elegiac combine in a description of the funeral 
pyre being got ready, the body being burnt, and the barrow being 
constructed—a scene at once immemorial and oddly contempo- 
rary. The Geat woman who cries out in dread as the flames con- 
sume the body of her dead lord could come straight from a 
late-twentieth-century news report, from Rwanda or Kosovo; her 
keen is a nightmare glimpse into the minds of people who have 
survived traumatic, even monstrous events and who are now be- 
ing exposed to a comfortless future. We immediately recognize 
her predicament and the pitch of her grief and find ourselves the 
better for having them expressed with such adequacy and dig- 
nity and unforgiving truth: 


Introduction 


xxi 


xxii 


On a height they kindled the hugest of all 

funeral fires; fumes of woodsmoke 

billowed darkly up, the blaze roared 

and drowned out their weeping, wind died down 

and flames wrought havoc in the hot bone-house, 

burning it to the core. They were disconsolate 

and wailed aloud for their lord's decease. 

A Geat woman too sang out in grief; 

with hair bound up, she unburdened herself 

of her worst fears, a wild litany 

of nightmare and lament: her nation invaded, 

enemies on the rampage, bodies in piles, 

slavery and abasement. Heaven swallowed the smoke. 
(ll. 3143-55) 


ABOUT THIS TRANSLATION 

When I was an undergraduate at Queen's University, Belfast, I 
studied Beowulf and other Anglo-Saxon poems and developed 
not only a feel for the language but a fondness for the melan- 
choly and fortitude that characterized the poetry. Consequently, 
when an invitation to translate the poem arrived from the editors 
of The Norton Anthology of English Literature, I was tempted to try 
my hand. While I had no great expertise in Old English, I had a 
strong desire to get back to the first stratum of the language and 
to "assay the hoard" (l. 2509). This was during the middle years 
of the 1980s, when I had begun a regular teaching job at Harvard 
and was opening my ear to the untethered music of some con- 
temporary American poetry. Saying yes to the Beowulf commis- 
sion would be (I argued with myself) a kind of aural antidote, a 
way of ensuring that my linguistic anchor would stay lodged on 
the Anglo-Saxon sea-floor. So I undertook to do it. 

Very soon, however, I hesitated. It was labour-intensive work, 
scriptorium-slow. I worked dutifully, like a sixth-former at home- 
work. I would set myself twenty lines a day, write out my glos- 


| Introduction 


sary of hard words in longhand, try to pick a way through the 
syntax, get the run of the meaning established in my head, and 
then hope that the lines could be turned into metrical shape and 
raised to the power of verse. Often, however, the whole attempt 
to turn it into modern English seemed to me like trying to bring 
down a megalith with a toy hammer. What had been so attractive 
in the first place, the hand-built, rock-sure feel of the thing, began 
to defeat me. I turned to other work, the commissioning editors 
did not pursue me, and the project went into abeyance. 

Even so, I had an instinct that it should not be let go. An un- 
derstanding I had worked out for myself concerning my own lin- 
guistic and literary origins made me reluctant to abandon the 
task. I had noticed, for example, that without any conscious in- 
tent on my part certain lines in the first poem in my first book 
conformed to the requirements of Anglo-Saxon metrics. These 
lines were made up of two balancing halves, each half containing 
two stressed syllables—"the spade sinks into gravelly ground: 
/ My father, digging. I look down”—and in the case of the sec- 
ond line, there was alliteration linking "digging" and "down" 
across the caesura. Part of me, in other words, had been writing 
Anglo-Saxon from the start. 

This was not surprising, given that the poet who had first 
formed my ear was Gerard Manley Hopkins. Hopkins was a chip 
off the Old English block, and the earliest lines I published when 
I was a student were as much pastiche Anglo-Saxon as they were 
pastiche Hopkins: “Starling thatch-watches and sudden swallow 
/ Straight breaks to mud-nest, home-rest rafter” and so on. I 
have written about all this elsewhere and about the relation of 
my Hopkins ventriloquism to the speech patterns of Ulster—es- 
pecially as these were caricatured by the poet W. R. Rodgers. Ul- 
ster people, according to Rodgers, are “an abrupt people / who 
like the spiky consonants of speech / and think the soft ones 
cissy” and get a kick out of “anything that gives or takes attack / 
like Micks, Teagues, tinkers’ gets, Vatican.” 

Joseph Brodsky once said that poets’ biographies are present in 


Introduction 


xxiii 


xxiv 


the sounds they make and I suppose all I am saying is that I con- 
sider Beowulf to be part of my voice-right. And yet to persuade 
myself that I was born into its language and that its language 
was born into me took a while: for somebody who grew up in the 
political and cultural conditions of Lord Brookeborough’s North- 
ern Ireland, it could hardly have been otherwise. 

Sprung from an Irish nationalist background and educated at a 
Northern Irish Catholic school, I had learned the Irish language 
and lived within a cultural and ideological frame that regarded it 
as the language which I should by rights have been speaking but 
which I had been robbed of. I have also written, for example, 
about the thrill I experienced when I stumbled upon the word 
lachtar in my Irish-English dictionary and found that this word, 
which my aunt had always used when speaking of a flock of 
chicks, was in fact an Irish language word, and, more than that, 
an Irish word associated in particular with County Derry. Yet 
here it was, surviving in my aunt’s English speech generations 
after her forebears and mine had ceased to speak Irish. For a long 
time, therefore, the little word was—to borrow a simile from 
Joyce—like a rapier point of consciousness pricking me with an 
awareness of language-loss and cultural dispossession, and 
tempting me into binary thinking about language. I tended to 
conceive of English and Irish as adversarial tongues, as either / or 
conditions rather than both / ands, and this was an attitude which 
for a long time hampered the development of a more confident 
and creative way of dealing with the whole vexed question—the 
question, that is, of the relationship between nationality, lan- 
guage, history, and literary tradition in Ireland. 

Luckily, I glimpsed the possibility of release from this kind of 
cultural determinism early on, in my first arts year at Queen's 
University, Belfast, when we were lectured on the history of the 
English language by Professor John Braidwood. Braidwood 
could not help informing us, for example, that the word 
“whiskey” is the same word as the Irish and Scots Gaelic word 


Introduction 


uisce, meaning water, and that the River Usk in Britain is there- 
fore to some extent the River Uisce (or Whiskey); and so in my 
mind the stream was suddenly turned into a kind of linguistic 
river of rivers issuing from a pristine Celto-British Land of Cock- 
aigne, a riverrun of Finnegans Wakespeak pouring out of the 
cleft rock of some pre-political, prelapsarian, ur-philological 
Big Rock Candy Mountain—and all of this had a wonderfully 
sweetening effect upon me. The Irish/English duality, the 
Celtic/Saxon antithesis were momentarily collapsed, and in the 
resulting etymological eddy a gleam of recognition flashed 
through the synapses and I glimpsed an elsewhere of potential 
which seemed at the same time to be a somewhere being remem- 
bered. The place on the language map where the Usk and the 
uisce and the whiskey coincided was definitely a place where the 
spirit might find a loophole, an escape route from what John 
Montague has called “the partitioned intellect,” away into some 
unpartitioned linguistic country, a region where one’s language 
would not be a simple badge of ethnicity or a matter of cultural 
preference or official imposition, but an entry into further lan- 
guage. And I eventually came upon one of these loopholes in 
Beowulf itself. 

What happened was that I found in the glossary to C. L. 
Wrenn's edition of the poem the Old English word meaning “to 
suffer" the word polian; and although at first it looked com- 
pletely strange with its thorn symbol instead of the familiar th, I 
gradually realized that it was not strange at all, for it was the 
word that older and less educated people would have used in the 
country where I grew up. "They'll just have to learn to thole," my 
aunt would say about some family who had suffered an unfore- 
seen bereavement. And now suddenly here was "thole" in the 
official textual world, mediated through the apparatus of a schol- 
arly edition, a little bleeper to remind me that my aunt's lan- 
guage was not just a self-enclosed family possession but an 
historical heritage, one that involved the journey polian had 


Introduction 


xxv 


xxvi 


made north into Scotland and then across into Ulster with the 
planters and then across from the planters to the locals who had 
originally spoken Irish and then farther across again when the 
Scots Irish emigrated to the American South in the eighteenth 
century. When I read in John Crowe Ransom the line "Sweet 
ladies, long may ye bloom, and toughly I hope ye may thole,” my 
heart lifted again, the world widened, something was furthered. 
The far-flungness of the word, the phenomenological pleasure of 
finding it variously transformed by Ransom's modernity and 
Beowulf's venerability made me feel vaguely something for 
which again I only found the words years later. What I was expe- 
riencing as I kept meeting up with thole on its multicultural 
odyssey was the feeling which Osip Mandelstam once defined as 
a "nostalgia for world culture." And this was a nostalgia I didn't 
even know I suffered until I experienced its fulfilment in this lit- 
tle epiphany. It was as if, on the analogy of baptism by desire, I 
had undergone something like illumination by philology. And 
even though I did not know it at the time, I had by then reached 
the point where I was ready to translate Beowulf. Polian had 
opened my right-of-way. 

So, in a sense, the decision to accept Norton's invitation was 
taken thirty-five years before the invitation was actually issued. 
But between one's sense of readiness to take on a subject and the 
actual inscription of the first lines, there is always a problematical 
hiatus. To put it another way: from the point of view of the 
writer, words in a poem need what the Polish poet Anna Swir 
once called "the equivalent of a biological right to life." The 
erotics of composition are essential to the process, some pre- 
reflective excitation and orientation, some sense that your own 
little verse-craft can dock safe and sound at the big quay of the 
language. And this is as true for translators as it is for poets at- 
tempting original work. 

It is one thing to find lexical meanings for the words and to 
have some feel for how the metre might go, but it is quite another 


Introduction 


thing to find the tuning fork that will give you the note and pitch 
for the overall music of the work. Without some melody sensed or 
promised, it is simply impossible for a poet to establish the trans- 
lator's right-of-way into and through a text. I was therefore lucky 
to hear this enabling note almost straight away, a familiar local 
voice, one that had belonged to relatives of my father's, people 
whom I had once described in a poem as "big voiced Scullions." 

I called them “big voiced" because when the men of the family 
spoke, the words they uttered came across with a weighty dis- 
tinctness, phonetic units as separate and defined as delph plat- 
ters displayed on a dresser shelf. A simple sentence such as “We 
cut the corn to-day" took on immense dignity when one of the 
Scullions spoke it. They had a kind of Native American solem- 
nity of utterance, as if they were announcing verdicts rather than 
making small talk. And when I came to ask myself how I wanted 
Beowulf to sound in my version, I realized I wanted it to be speak- 
able by one of those relatives. I therefore tried to frame the fa- 
mous opening lines in cadences that would have suited their 
voices, but that still echoed with the sound and sense of the 
Anglo-Saxon: 


Hwaet wē Gàr-Dena in gear-dagum 
péod-cyninga  prym gefrünon, 
hū 04 ebelingas ellen fremedon. 


Conventional renderings of hwaet, the first word of the poem, 
tend towards the archaic literary, with “lo” and “hark” and 
“behold” and "attend" and—more colloquially—"listen" being 
some of the solutions offered previously. But in Hiberno-English 
Scullionspeak, the particle "so" came naturally to the rescue, be- 
cause in that idiom "so" operates as an expression which obliter- 
ates all previous discourse and narrative, and at the same time 
functions as an exclamation calling for immediate attention. So, 


"so" it was: 


Introduction 


xxvii 


So. The Spear-Danes in days gone by 
and the kings who ruled them had courage and greatness. 
We have heard of those princes’ heroic campaigns. 


I came to the task of translating Beowulf with a prejudice 
favour of forthright delivery. I remembered the voice of the poe 
as being attractively direct, even though the diction was orni 
and the narrative method at times oblique. What I had alwa 
loved was a kind of foursquareness about the utterance, a feeli 
of living inside a constantly indicative mood, in the presence 
an understanding that assumes you share an awareness of t 
perilous nature of life and are yet capable of seeing it stead 
and, when necessary, sternly. There is an undeluded qual 
about the Beowulf poet’s sense of the world which gives his lir 
immense emotional credibility and allows him to make gene: 
observations about life which are far too grounded in expe 
ence and reticence to be called “moralizing.” These so-call 
“gnomic” parts of the poem have the cadence and force of earn 
wisdom, and their combination of cogency and verity was agé 
something that I could remember from the speech I heard as 
youngster in the Scullion kitchen. When I translate lines 24-25 
^Behaviour that's admired / is the path to power among peor 
everywhere," I am attending as much to the grain of my origir 
vernacular as to the content of the Anglo-Saxon lines. But th 
the evidence suggests that this middle ground between oral ti 
dition and the demands of written practice was also the grow 
occupied by the Beowulf poet. The style of the poem is hospitat 
to the kind of formulaic phrases which are the stock-in-trade 
oral bards, and yet it is marked too by the self-consciousness 
an artist convinced that “we must labour to be beautiful.” 

In one area, my own labours have been less than thoroug 
going. I have not followed the strict metrical rules that bound t 
Anglo-Saxon scop. I have been guided by the fundamental p: 
tern of four stresses to the line, but I allow myself several trar 
gressions. For example, I don't always employ alliteration, a1 


xxviii | Introduction 


sometimes I alliterate only in one half of the line. When these 
breaches occur, it is because I prefer to let the natural "sound of 
sense" prevail over the demands of the convention: I have been 
reluctant to force an artificial shape or an unusual word choice 
just for the sake of correctness. 

In general, the alliteration varies from the shadowy to the sub- 
stantial, from the properly to the improperly distributed. Sub- 
stantial and proper are such lines as 


The fortunes of war favoured Hróthgar (I. 64) 
the highest in the land, would lénd advice (l. 172) 
and find friéndship in the Father’s embrace (l. 188). 


Here the caesura is definite, there are two stresses in each half of 
the line, and the first stressed syllable of the second half alliter- 
ates with the first or the second or both of the stressed syllables 
in the first half. The main deviation from this is one which other 
translators have allowed themselves—the freedom, that is, to al- 
literate on the fourth stressed syllable, a practice which breaks 
the rule but which nevertheless does bind the line together: 


We have héard of those princes’ | heróic campdigns (I. 3) 
and he crossed óver into the Lórd's kéeping (l. 27). 


In the course of the translation, such deviations, distortions, syn- 
copations, and extensions do occur; what I was after first and 
foremost was a narrative line that sounded as if it meant busi- 
ness, and I was prepared to sacrifice other things in pursuit of 
this directness of utterance. 

The appositional nature of the Old English syntax, for exam- 
ple, is somewhat slighted here, as is the Beowulf poet’s resource- 
fulness with synonyms and (to a lesser extent) his genius for 
compound-making, kennings, and all sorts of variation. Usu- 
ally—as at line 1209, where I render yda ful as “frothing wave- 
vat,” and line 1523, where beado-léoma becomes "battle-torch"—I 


Introduction | 


xxix 


XXX 


try to match the poet’s analogy-seeking habit at its most original; 
and I use all the common coinages for the lord of the nation, 
variously referred to as “ring-giver,” “treasure-giver,” “his peo- 
ple’s shield” or “shepherd” or “helmet.” I have been less faithful, 
however, to the way the poet rings the changes when it comes to 
compounds meaning a sword or a spear or a battle or any bloody 
encounter with foes. Old English abounds in vigorous and evoc- 
ative and specifically poetic words for these things, but I have 
tended to follow modern usage and in the main have called a 
sword a sword. 

There was one area, however, where a certain strangeness in 
the diction came naturally. In those instances where a local Ulster 
word seemed either poetically or historically right, I felt free to 
use it. For example, at lines 324 and 2988 I use the word "graith" 
for "harness" and at 3026 "hoked" for "rooted about" because 
the local term seemed in each case to have special body and 
force. Then, for reasons of historical suggestiveness, I have in 
several instances used the word "bawn" to refer to Hrothgar's 
hall. In Elizabethan English, bawn (from the Irish bó-dhún, a fort 
for cattle) referred specifically to the fortified dwellings which 
the English planters built in Ireland to keep the dispossessed na- 
tives at bay, so it seemed the proper term to apply to the embat- 
tled keep where Hrothgar waits and watches. Indeed, every time 
I read the lovely interlude that tells of the minstrel singing in 
Heorot just before the first attacks of Grendel, I cannot help 
thinking of Edmund Spenser in Kilcolman Castle, reading the 
early cantos of The Faerie Queene to Sir Walter Raleigh, just before 
the Irish burned the castle and drove Spenser out of Munster 
back to the Elizabethan court. Putting a bawn into Beowulf seems 
one way for an Irish poet to come to terms with that complex his- 
tory of conquest and colony, absorption and resistance, integrity 
and antagonism, a history which has to be clearly acknowledged 
by all concerned in order to render it ever more “willable for- 
ward / Again and again and again." 

S.H. 


Introduction 


A Note on Names 


Old English, like Modern German, contained many compound 
words, most of which have been lost in Modern English. Most of 
the names in Beowulf are compounds. Hrothgar is a combination 
of words meaning "glory" and "spear"; the name of his older 
brother, Heorogar, comes from "army" and "spear"; Hrothgar's 
sons Hrethric and Hrothmund contain the first elements of their 
father's name combined, respectively, with ric (kingdom, empire, 
Modern German Reich) and mund (hand, protection). As in the 
case of the Danish dynasty, family names often alliterate. Mascu- 
line names of the warrior class have military associations. The 
importance of family and the demands of alliteration frequently 
lead to the designation of characters by formulas identifying 
them in terms of relationships. Thus Beowulf is referred to as 
“son of Ecgtheow” or “kinsman of Hygelac" (his uncle and lord). 

The Old English spellings of names are mostly preserved in 
the translation. A few rules of pronunciation are worth keeping 
in mind. Initial H before r was sounded, and so Hrothgar's name 
alliterates with that of his brother Heorogar. The combination cg 
has the value of dg in words like "edge." The first element in the 
name of Beowulf's father "Ecgtheow" is the same word as 
"edge," and, by the figure of speech called synecdoche (a part of 
something stands for the whole), ecg stands for sword and Ecg- 


theow means "sword-servant." 
Alfred David 


BEOWULF 


20 


Hwet we Gar-Dena in gear-dagum 
béod-cyninga prym gefrünon, 
hū 6a zbelingas ellen fremedon. 

Oft Scyld Scefing sceabena preatum, 
monegum m&gbum meodo-setla oftéah; 
egsode Eorle, syddan &rest weard 
feasceaft funden, hé bes frofre gebad: 
wéox under wolcnum, weord-myndum pàh, 
odpet him &ghwylc para ymb-sittendra 
ofer hron-rade hyran scolde, 
gomban gyldan: pet wes god cyning! 
D&m eafera wes efter cenned 
geong in geardum, pone God sende 
folce to frofre; fyren-dearfe ongeat, 
pet hie r drugon  aldor-lease 
lange hwile; him pes Lif-fréa, 
wuldres Wealdend, worold-are forgeaf; 
Béowulf wes breme . —blzd wide sprang— 


10 


Scyldes eafera, Scede-landum in. 

Swa sceal geong guma gode gewyrcean, 

fromum feoh-giftum on feeder bearme, 

pet hine on ylde eft gewunigen 20 


BEOWULF 


So. The Spear-Danes in days gone by 


and the kings who ruled them had courage and greatness. 


We have heard of those princes’ heroic campaigns. 


There was Shield Sheafson, scourge of many tribes, 
a wrecker of mead-benches, rampaging among foes. 
This terror of the hall-troops had come far. 

A foundling to start with, he would flourish later on 
as his powers waxed and his worth was proved. 

In the end each clan on the outlying coasts 

beyond the whale-road had to yield to him 

and begin to pay tribute. That was one good king. 


Afterwards a boy-child was born to Shield, 

a cub in the yard, a comfort sent 

by God to that nation. He knew what they had tholed, 
the long times and troubles they’d come through 
without a leader; so the Lord of Life, 

the glorious Almighty, made this man renowned. 
Shield had fathered a famous son: 

Beow’s name was known through the north. 
And a young prince must be prudent like that, 
giving freely while his father lives 

so that afterwards in age when fighting starts 


BEOWULF 


The Danes have 
legends about their 
warrior kings. The 
most famous was 
Shield Sheafson, who 
founded the ruling 
house 


30 


40 


wil-gesipas, bonne wig cume, 
léode gel&sten; lof-d&dum sceal 
in m&gba gehwere man gebeon. 

Him 64 Scyld gewat tō gescep-hwile, 
fela-hror, feran on Frean w&re. 
Hi hyne bà zetb&ron tō brimes farode, 
swése gesipas, swa he selfa bed, 
benden wordum wéold wine Scyldinga, 
léof land-fruma lange áhte. 
bér æt hyde stöd  hringed-stefna, 
isig ond üt-füs, æpþelinges fær; 
alédon pa léofne béoden, 
béaga bryttan on bearm scipes, 
mérne be meste; pbé&r wes madma fela 
of feor-wegum, frætwa, gel&ded. 
Ne hyrde ic cymlicor céol gegyrwan 
hilde-wépnum ond heado-wédum, 
billum ond byrnum; him on bearme leg 
madma menigo, bà him mid scoldon 
on flodes ht feor gewitan. 
Nales hi hine làssan  làcum téodan, 
péod-gestréonum, pon pa dydon, 
be hine æt frumsceafte ford onsendon 
&nne ofer ye umbor-wesende. 
ba gyt hi him 4setton segend gyldenne 
héah ofer heafod, lēton holm beran, 


geafon on gar-secg; him wes geomor sefa, 


murnende mod. Men ne cunnon 
secgan to sdde, sele-r&dende, 


hzleó under heofenum, hwa b&m hleste onféng. 


Da wes on burgum Beowulf Scyldinga, 


BEOWULF 


30 


40 


50 


steadfast companions will stand by him 
and hold the line. Behaviour that's admired 
is the path to power among people everywhere. 


Shield was still thriving when his time came 
and he crossed over into the Lord's keeping. 
His warrior band did what he bade them 
when he laid down the law among the Danes: 
they shouldered him out to the sea's flood, 


the chief they revered who had long ruled them. 


A ring-whorled prow rode in the harbour, 
ice-clad, outbound, a craft for a prince. 

They stretched their beloved lord in his boat, 
laid out by the mast, amidships, 

the great ring-giver. Far-fetched treasures 
were piled upon him, and precious gear. 

I never heard before of a ship so well furbished 
with battle tackle, bladed weapons 

and coats of mail. The massed treasure 

was loaded on top of him: it would travel far 
on out into the ocean's sway. 

They decked his body no less bountifully 
with offerings than those first ones did 

who cast him away when he was a child 
and launched him alone out over the waves. 
And they set a gold standard up 

high above his head and let him drift 

to wind and tide, bewailing him 

and mourning their loss. No man can tell, 
no wise man in hall or weathered veteran 
knows for certain who salvaged that load. 


Then it fell to Beow to keep the forts. 


BEOWULF 


Shield's fur 


79 


8o 


léofléod-cyning, longe prage 
folcum gefrége; fzder ellor hwearf, 
aldor of earde. Oppzt him eft onwóc 
héah Healfdene; héold, penden lifde, 
gamol ond giid-réouw, glade Scyldingas. 
Dém féower beam ford-gerimed 
in worold wócun: weoroda réswan, 
Heorogar, ond Hroógàr ond Halga til; 
hyrde ic pet ..... wes Onelan cwén, 
Hea6o-Scilfingas heals-gebedda. 

ba wes Hroógare here-spéd gyfen, 
wiges weord-mynd, bat him his wine-magas 
georne hyrdon, oddbet seo geogod geweox 
mago-driht micel. Him on mod be-arn 
pet heal-reced  hatan wolde, 
medo-zrn micel men gewyrcean, 
bonne yldo bearn fre gefrünon, 
ond b&r on innan eall ged&lan 
geongum ond ealdum, | swylc him God sealde, 
büton folc-scare ond feorum gumena. 
Da ic wide gefregn weorc gebannan 
manigre mégbe  geond bisne middan-geard, 
folc-stede fretwan. Him on fyrste gelomp, 
&dre mid yldum, pet hit wearó eal-gearo, 
heal-zrna má&st; scop him Heort naman, 
sé be his wordes geweald wide hefde. 
Hē béot ne aleh, béagas d&lde, 
sinc zt symle. Sele hlifade 
héah ond horn-géap, heado-wylma bad, 
ladan liges; ne wes hit lenge pà gen, 
pet se ecg-hete | abum-swerian 
after wel-nide wecnan scolde. 


BEOWULF 


79 


He was well regarded and ruled the Danes Shield's heirs: his 
for a long time after his father took leave "i i ao 
of his life on earth. And then his heir, Halfdane by 

the great Halfdane, held sway Hrothgar 
for as long as he lived, their elder and warlord. 

He was four times a father, this fighter prince: 

one by one they entered the world, 

Heorogar, Hrothgar, the good Halga 

and a daughter, I have heard, who was Onela’s queen, 


a balm in bed to the battle-scarred Swede. 


The fortunes of war favoured Hrothgar. King Hrothgar 
Friends and kinsmen flocked to his ranks, builds Hegrot Hal 
young followers, a force that grew 

to be a mighty army. So his mind turned 

to hall-building: he handed down orders 

for men to work on a great mead-hall 

meant to be a wonder of the world forever; 

it would be his throne-room and there he would dispense 
his God-given goods to young and old— 

but not the common land or people's lives. 

Far and wide through the world, I have heard, 

orders for work to adorn that wallstead 

were sent to many peoples. And soon it stood there, 
finished and ready, in full view, 

the hall of halls. Heorot was the name 

he had settled on it, whose utterance was law. 

Nor did he renege, but doled out rings 

and torques at the table. The hall towered, 

its gables wide and high and awaiting 

a barbarous burning. That doom abided, 

but in time it would come: the killer instinct 

unleashed among in-laws, the blood-lust rampant. 


BEOWULF 7 


go 


Da se ellen-gést earfodlice 
prage gepolode, sé pe in pystrum bad, 
pet hé dogora gehwam dream gehyrde 
hlüdne in healle; þēr was hearpan swég, 
swutolsang scopes. Sægde sé be cüpe 9o 
frumsceaft fira feorran reccan, 
cwaó pet se /Elmihtiga eordan worhte, 
wlite-beorhtne wang, swa weter bebügeó: 
gesette sige-hrébig sunnan ond monan 
léoman to léohte  land-büendum, 
ond gefretwade foldan scéatas 
leomum ond leafum; līf Eac gescedp 
cynna gehwylcum, para de cwice hwyrfap. 
Swa 04 driht-guman dréamum lifdon, 
éadiglice, oddet àn ongan 
fyrene fremman  feond on helle. 100 
Wes se grimma gest Grendel haten, 
mére mearc-stapa, sé be moras héold, 
fen ond festen; fifel-cynnes eard 
won-séli wer weardode hwile, 
sipóan him Scyppend  forscrifen hefde 
in Caines cynne— pone cwealm gewrec 
éce Drihten, pas pe hē Abel slog. 
Ne gefeah he p&re féhde, ac hé hine feor forwrec, 
Metod for by mane, man-cynne fram. 
Panon untydras ealle onwocon, 110 
eotenas ond ylfe ond orcneas, 
swylce gigantas, pba wid Gode wunnon 
lange brage; hé him des léan forgeald. 
Gewat 64 neosian, sybóan niht becóm, 
héan hüses, hū hit Hring-Dene 


BEOWULF 


Then a powerful demon, a prowler through the dark, 
nursed a hard grievance. It harrowed him 

to hear the din of the loud banquet 

every day in the hall, the harp being struck 
and the clear song of a skilled poet 

telling with mastery of man’s beginnings, 
how the Almighty had made the earth 

a gleaming plain girdled with waters; 

in His splendour He set the sun and the moon 
to be earth’s lamplight, lanterns for men, 

and filled the broad lap of the world 

with branches and leaves; and quickened life 
in every other thing that moved. 


So times were pleasant for the people there 

until finally one, a fiend out of hell, 

began to work his evil in the world. 

Grendel was the name of this grim demon 
haunting the marches, marauding round the heath 
and the desolate fens; he had dwelt for a time 

in misery among the banished monsters, 

Cain’s clan, whom the Creator had outlawed 

and condemned as outcasts. For the killing of Abel 
the Eternal Lord had exacted a price: 

Cain got no good from committing that murder 
because the Almighty made him anathema 

and out of the curse of his exile there sprang 

ogres and elves and evil phantoms 

and the giants too who strove with God 

time and again until He gave them their reward. 


So, after nightfall, Grendel set out 
for the lofty house, to see how the Ring-Danes 


BEOWULF 


Heorot is threatened 


Grendel, a monster 
descended from 
“Cain's clan," 
begins to prowl 


Grendel attacks 
Heorot 


130 


140 


efter béor-bege gebūn hefdon; 

fand pa 6&r inne  zpelinga gedriht 
swefan efter symble— sorge ne cüóon, 
wonsceaft wera. Wiht unhélo, 

grim ond gr&édig, gearo sõna wes, 
réoc ond rébe, ond on reste genam 
pritig þegna; panon eft gewat 

hiide hrémig to ham faran, 

mid bare wel-fylle wica néosan. 

Da wes on thtan mid &r-dege 
Grendles güÓ-creft gumum undyrne; 
pa wes efter wiste wōp up ahafen, 
micel morgen-swég. Mére beoden, 
epeling &r-god, unblide sæt, 
polode óryó-swyà, pbegn-sorge dréah, 
syOpan hie pes ladan last sceawedon 
wergan gastes. Wes bet gewin tō strang, 
lað ond longsum. Nes hit lengra fyrst, 
ac ymb àne niht eft gefremede 
mor6-beala mare ond nó mearn fore, 
féhde ond fyrene; wes tō fest on pam. 
bà wes ead-fynde þe him elles hwér 
gerümlicor reste sohte, 
bed efter bürum, 64 him gebéacnod wes, 
gesegd soólice sweotolan tacne 
heal-degnes hete; héold hyne sydpan 
fyr ond festor sé b&m féonde etwand. 

Swa rixode ond wid rihte wan 
ana wideallum, odpbet idel stod 
hüsa selest. Wes seo hwil micel: 
twelf wintra tid torn gebolode 


BEOWULF 


130 


140 


were settling into it after their drink, 

and there he came upon them, a company of the best 
asleep from their feasting, insensible to pain 

and human sorrow. Suddenly then 

the God-cursed brute was creating havoc: 

greedy and grim, he grabbed thirty men 

from their resting places and rushed to his lair, 
flushed up and inflamed from the raid, 

blundering back with the butchered corpses. 


Then as dawn brightened and the day broke 
Grendel’s powers of destruction were plain: 
their wassail was over, they wept to heaven 
and mourned under morning. Their mighty prince, 
the storied leader, sat stricken and helpless, 
humiliated by the loss of his guard, 

bewildered and stunned, staring aghast 

at the demor's trail, in deep distress. 

He was numb with grief, but got no respite 

for one night later merciless Grendel 

struck again with more gruesome murders. 
Malignant by nature, he never showed remorse. 
It was easy then to meet with a man 

shifting himself to a safer distance 

to bed in the bothies, for who could be blind 

to the evidence of his eyes, the obviousness 

of that hall-watcher's hate? Whoever escaped 
kept a weather-eye open and moved away. 


So Grendel ruled in defiance of right, 

one against all, until the greatest house 

in the world stood empty, a deserted wallstead. 
For twelve winters, seasons of woe, 


BEONWULF 


King Hrothgar's 
distress and 
helplessness 


11 


150 


170 


12 


wine Scyldinga, wéana gehwelcne, 
Sidra sorga; fordam secgum wearó, 
ylda bearnum, undyrne cid, 150 
gyddum geómore, patte Grendel wan 
hwile wid Hropgar, hete-nidas weg, 
fyrene ond fzhóe fela misséra, 
singale sce; sibbe ne wolde 
wid manna hwone megenes Deniga, 
feorh-bealo feorran, féa pingian, 
ne b&r n&nig witena wénan porfte 
beorhtre bote td banan folmum; 
ac se &gl$ca  éhtende wes, 
deorc deap-scüa dugube ond geogobe, 160 
seomade ond syrede; sin-nihte héold 
mistige móras; men ne cunnon 
hwyder hel-rünan  hwyrftum scripaó. 
Swa fela fyrena  feond man-cynnes, 
atolan-gengea, oft gefremede, 
heardra hynóa; Heorot eardode, 
sinc-fage sel sweartum nihtum; 
no hé pone gif-stoó] gretan moste, 
mapdum for Metode, nē his myne wisse. 
Pet was wréc micel wine Scyldinga, 
modes brecóa. Monig oft geszt 
rice to rune, | rd eahtedon, 170 
hwet swid-ferhdum  selest wére 
wid fér-gryrum tō gefremmanne. 
Hwilum hie gehéton et herg-trafum 
wig-weorpunga, wordum bédon, 
pet him gast-bona  géoce gefremede 
wid beod-breaum. Swylc wes péaw hyra, 


BEOWULF 


the lord of the Shieldings suffered under 

his load of sorrow; and so, before long, 

the news was known over the whole world. 

Sad lays were sung about the beset king, 

the vicious raids and ravages of Grendel, 

his long and unrelenting feud, 

nothing but war; how he would never 

parley or make peace with any Dane 

nor stop his death-dealing nor pay the death-price. 
No counsellor could ever expect 

fair reparation from those rabid hands. 

All were endangered; young and old 

were hunted down by that dark death-shadow 
who lurked and swooped in the long nights 

on the misty moors; nobody knows 

where these reavers from hell roam on their errands. 


So Grendel waged his lonely war, 
inflicting constant cruelties on the people, 
atrocious hurt. He took over Heorot, 
haunted the glittering hall after dark, 

but the throne itself, the treasure-seat, 


he was kept from approaching; he was the Lord’s outcast. 


These were hard times, heart-breaking 

for the prince of the Shieldings; powerful counsellors, 
the highest in the land, would lend advice, 

plotting how best the bold defenders 

might resist and beat off sudden attacks. 

Sometimes at pagan shrines they vowed 

offerings to idols, swore oaths 

that the killer of souls might come to their aid 

and save the people. That was their way, 


BEOWULF 


The Danes, hard- 
pressed, turn for 
help to heathen gods 


13 


190 


200 


14 


h&benra hyht; helle gemundon 

in mod-sefan, Metod hie ne cüpon, 180 

dida Démend, ne wiston hie Drihten God 

né hie hüru heofena Helm — herian ne cüpon, 

wuldres Waldend. Wa bid b&m ðe sceal 

purh slidne nió  sawle besctifan 

in fyres fepm, frofre ne wenan, 

wihte gewendan! Wel bid p&m pe mot 

efter déad-dege Drihten sécean 

ond to Feder fepmum — freodo wilnian! 
Swa 04 mél-ceare maga Healfdenes 

singala séad; ne mihte snotor hzeleó 

wéan onwendan; wes bet gewin to swyó, 190 

lap ond longsum, þe on da leode becdm, 

nyd-wracu nip-grim, niht-bealwa mest. 
Pet fram hàm gefregn Higelaces þegn, 

god mid Géatum, Grendles d&da; 

sé was mon-cynnes megenes strengest 

on bam dege  bysses lifes, 

zbele ond eacen. Hét him yd-lidan 

godne gegyrwan; cwæð, hé giid-cyning 

ofer swan-rade sécean wolde, 

mérne péoden, pa him wes manna pearf. 

Done sió-fet him snotere ceorlas 200 

lyt-hwon logon, pbéah hé him léof wre; 

hwetton hige-rofne, hl sceawedon. 

Hefde se goda  Geata léoda 

cempan gecorone, para pe he cénoste 

findan mihte; fif-tyna sum 

sund-wudu sohte; secg wisade, 

lagu-creftig mon, land-gemyrcu. 


BEOWULF 


their heathenish hope; deep in their hearts 

they remembered hell. The Almighty Judge 

of good deeds and bad, the Lord God, 

Head of the Heavens and High King of the World, 
was unknown to them. Oh, cursed is he 

who in time of trouble has to thrust his soul 

in the fire’s embrace, forfeiting help; 

he has nowhere to turn. But blessed is he 

who after death can approach the Lord 

and find friendship in the Father’s embrace. 


So that troubled time continued, woe 

that never stopped, steady affliction 

for Halfdane’s son, too hard an ordeal. 
There was panic after dark, people endured 
raids in the night, riven by the terror. 


When he heard about Grendel, Hygelac’s thane 
was on home ground, over in Geatland. 

There was no one else like him alive. 

In his day, he was the mightiest man on earth, 
high-born and powerful. He ordered a boat 
that would ply the waves. He announced his plan: 
to sail the swan’s road and search out that king, 
the famous prince who needed defenders. 
Nobody tried to keep him from going, 

no elder denied him, dear as he was to them. 
Instead, they inspected omens and spurred 

his ambition to go, whilst he moved about 

like the leader he was, enlisting men, 

the best he could find; with fourteen others 

the warrior boarded the boat as captain, 

a canny pilot along coast and currents. 


BEOWULF 


At the court of King 
Hygelac, a Geat 
warrior prepares to 
help Hrothgar 


15 


230 


240 


16 


Fyrst ford gewat; flota wes on yóum, 210 
bat under beorge. Beornas gearwe 
on stefn stigon— stréamas wundon, 


sund wid sande; secgas b&ron 
on bearm nacan  beorhte frztwe, 
giid-searo geatolic; guman üt scufon, 
weras on wil-sió wudu bundenne. 
Gewat bà ofer w$g-holm, winde gefysed, 
flota fámi-heals, fugle gelicost, 
odpzt ymb 4an-tid opres dogores 
wunden-stefna gewaden hefde, 26 
pet 64 lidende land gesawon, 
brim-clifu blican, beorgas stéape, 
side s&-nessas; pba wes sund liden, 
&o-letes æt ende. Panon up hrade 
Wedera léode on wang stigon, 
s&-wudu séldon —syrcan hrysedon, 
güÓ-gewado; Gode bancedon, 
pes pe him yb-làde €ade wurdon. 
ba of wealle geseah weard Scildinga, 
sé be holm-clifu healdan scolde, 
beran ofer bolcan beorhte randas, 230 
fyrd-searu füslicu; hine fyrwyt bræc 
mod-gehygdum, hwet ba men w&&ron. 
Gewat him pa to waroðe — wicge ridan 
þegn Hroógares, brymmum cwehte 
megen-wudu mundum, mebel-wordum fregn: 
“Hwee syndon gë searo-hebbendra, 
byrnum werede, þe pus brontne céol 
ofer lagu-stréte  l&dan cwomon, 
hider ofer holmas? Ic hwile wzs 


BEOWULF 


Time went by, the boat was on water, 

in close under the cliffs. 

Men climbed eagerly up the gangplank, 

sand churned in surf, warriors loaded 

a cargo of weapons, shining war-gear 

in the vessel’s hold, then heaved out, 

away with a will in their wood-wreathed ship. 
Over the waves, with the wind behind her 

and foam at her neck, she flew like a bird 

until her curved prow had covered the distance 
and on the following day, at the due hour, 

those seafarers sighted land, 

sunlit cliffs, sheer crags 

and looming headlands, the landfall they sought. 
It was the end of their voyage and the Geats vaulted 
over the side, out on to the sand, 

and moored their ship. There was a clash of mail 
and a thresh of gear. They thanked God 


for that easy crossing on a calm sea. 


When the watchman on the wall, the Shieldings’ lookout 
whose job it was to guard the sea-cliffs, 

saw shields glittering on the gangplank 

and battle-equipment being unloaded 

he had to find out who and what 

the arrivals were. So he rode to the shore, 

this horseman of Hrothgar’s, and challenged them 

in formal terms, flourishing his spear: 


“What kind of men are you who arrive 

rigged out for combat in coats of mail, 

sailing here over the sea-lanes 

in your steep-hulled boat? I have been stationed 


BEOWULF 


The hero and his 
troop sail from the 
land of the Geats 


The Danish coast- 
guard challenges the 
outsiders 


17 


250 


260 


270 


18 


ende-s&ta, #&g-wearde héold, 

bé on land Dena lāðra n&nig 

mid scip-herge scedpan ne meahte. 

Nō her ciidlicor cuman ongunnon 

lind-hebbende; né ge leafnes-word 

gid-fremmendra  gearwe ne wisson, 

maga gemédu. Néfre ic màran geseah 

eorla ofer eorban, donne is eower sum, 

secg on searwum; nis pet seld-guma, 

wápnum geweordad; néfre him his wlite leoge, 

&nlic ansyn. Nii ic Gower sceal 

frum-cyn witan, &r gé fyr heonan 

leas-sceaweras on land Dena 

furpur feran. Ni gé feor-büend, 

mere-lidende, minne gehyraó 

anfealdne gepoht; ofost is sélest 

to gecyóanne hwanan éowre cyme syndon.’ 
Him se yldesta andswarode, 

werodes wisa, word-hord onléac: 

"We synt gum-cynnes Géata léode 

ond Higelaces heord-genéatas; 

wes min feder folcum gecyped, 

&bele ord-fruma Ecgbéow haten,— 

gebad wintra worn, &r hé on weg hwurfe, 

gamol of geardum; hine gearwe geman 


> 


witena wél-hwylc wide geond eorpan. 
Wé purh holdne hige  hlaford pinne, 
sunu Healfdenes, sécean cwomon, 
léod-gebyrgean; wes pü iis làrena god! 
Habbaó we tō p&m m&ran micel &rende, 
Deniga fréan; ne sceal p&r dyrne sum 
wesan, pes ic wene. bi wast— gif hit is, 


BEOWULF 


as lookout on this coast for a long time. 

My job is to watch the waves for raiders, 

any danger to the Danish shore. 

Never before has a force under arms 
disembarked so openly—not bothering to ask 
if the sentries allowed them safe passage 

or the clan had consented. Nor have I seen 

a mightier man-at-arms on this earth 

than the one standing here: unless I am mistaken, 
he is truly noble. This is no mere 

hanger-on in a hero’s armour. 

So now, before you fare inland 

as interlopers, I have to be informed 

about who you are and where you hail from. 
Outsiders from across the water, 

I say it again: the sooner you tell 

where you come from and why, the better.” 


The leader of the troop unlocked his word-hoard; 
the distinguished one delivered this answer: 
“We belong by birth to the Geat people 

and owe allegiance to Lord Hygelac. 

In his day, my father was a famous man, 

a noble warrior-lord named Ecgtheow. 

He outlasted many a long winter 

and went on his way. All over the world 

men wise in counsel continue to remember him. 
We come in good faith to find your lord 

and nation’s shield, the son of Halfdane. 

Give us the right advice and direction. 

We have arrived here on a great errand 

to the lord of the Danes, and I believe therefore 


there should be nothing hidden or withheld between us. 


BEOWULF 


The Geat hero 
announces himself 
and explains his 
mission 


290 


300 


20 


swa we soplice secgan hyrdon— 


pet mid Scyldingum — sceaóona ic nat hwylc, 


déogol d&d-hata, deorcum nihtum 
éawed purh egsan  uncüóne niÓ, 

hyndu ond hra-fyl. Ic pes Hroógàr meg 
purh rümne sefan  r&d geléran, 

hū hē frod ond god  feond oferswyóep — 
gyf him edwenden  &fre scolde 

bealuwa bisigu, bōt eft cuman— 

ond bà cear-wylmas | colran wurdab; 
odde à sybóan  earfoó-bprage, 

préa-njd þolað, penden þær wunad 

on héah-stede — hüsa sélest.” 

Weard mapelode, ðær on wicge sæt, 
ombeht unforht; ‘Æghwæpþres sceal 
scearp scyld-wiga gescad witan, 
worda ond worca, sé be wel benced. 

Ic pet gehyre, bat pis is hold weorod 
fréan Scyldinga. Gewitap ford beran 
wépen ond gewédu; ic Gow wisige: 
swylce ic magu-begnas mine hate 
wid feonda gehwone flotan Gowerne, 
niw-tyrwydne  nacan on sande 

àrum healdan, opóst eft byred 

ofer lagu-stréamas léofne mannan 
wudu wunden-hals tō Weder-mearce: 
god-fremmendra | swylcum gifepe bid, 
pet pone hilde-rés hal gediged.” 

Gewiton him pa feran. Flota stille bad, 
seomode on sale sīd-fæþmed scip, 
on ancre fest. Eofor-lic scionon 


BEOWULF 


280 


290 


300 


So tell us if what we have heard is true 
about this threat, whatever it is, 

this danger abroad in the dark nights, 

this corpse-maker mongering death 

in the Shieldings’ country. I come to proffer 
my wholehearted help and counsel. 

I can show the wise Hrothgar a way 

to defeat his enemy and find respite— 

if any respite is to reach him, ever. 

I can calm the turmoil and terror in his mind. 
Otherwise, he must endure woes 

and live with grief for as long as his hall 
stands at the horizon, on its high ground.” 


Undaunted, sitting astride his horse, The coast-guard 
the coast-guard answered, “Anyone with gumption e TECHN 
and a sharp mind will take the measure 

of two things: what's said and what's done. 

I believe what you have told me: that you are a troop 

loyal to our king. So come ahead 

with your arms and your gear, and I will guide you. 

What's more, I'll order my own comrades 

on their word of honour to watch your boat 

down there on the strand—keep her safe 

in her fresh tar, until the time comes 

for her curved prow to preen on the waves 

and bear this hero back to Geatland. 

May one so valiant and venturesome 

come unharmed through the clash of battle." 


So they went on their way. The ship rode the water, 


broad-beamed, bound by its hawser 
and anchored fast. Boar-shapes flashed 


BEOWULF 21 


310 


320 


330 


22 


ofer hléor-bergan: gehroden golde, 
fah ond fy-heard, ferh wearde héold: 
güb-mod grummon. Guman Onetton, 
sigon ztsomne, oppet hy sæl timbred, 
geatolic ond gold-fah ongyton mihton; 
bat wes fore-mérost  fold-büendum 
receda under roderum, on bém se rica bad; 
lixte seleoma ofer landa fela. 

Him pa hilde-déor hof modigra 

torht get&hte, pat hie him td mihton 
gegnum gangan; güó-beorna sum 
wicg gewende, word efter cwed: 
“Mal is mé to féran. Feder al-walda 
mid ar-stafum | eowic gehealde 

sida gesunde! Ic to sē wille, 

wid wrad werod wearde healdan.” 

Strét wes stan-fah, stig wisode 
gumum etgedere. Gtd-byrne scan, 
heard, hond-locen, hring-iren scir 
song in searwum. Pā hi tō sele furóum 
in hyra gryre-geatwum gangan cwomon, 
setton s&-mépbe side scyldas, 
rondas regn-hearde, wid bass recedes weal; 
bugon bà to bence, byrnan hringdon, 
gūð-searo gumena. Garas stodon, 
s&-manna searo, samod etgedere, 
&sc-holt ufan grég; wes se 1ren-preat 
wepnum gewurpad. ba ðær wlonc heled 
Oret-mecgas efter epelum fregn: 

“Hwanon ferigeaó ge — fatte scyldas, 
gr&ége syrcan ond grim-helmas, 


BEOWULF 


320 


330 


above their cheek-guards, the brightly forged 
work of goldsmiths, watching over 

those stern-faced men. They marched in step, 
hurrying on till the timbered hall 

rose before them, radiant with gold. 

Nobody on earth knew of another 

building like it. Majesty lodged there, 

its light shone over many lands. 

So their gallant escort guided them 

to that dazzling stronghold and indicated 

the shortest way to it; then the noble warrior 
wheeled on his horse and spoke these words: 
“It is time for me to go. May the Almighty 
Father keep you and in His kindness 

watch over your exploits. I’m away to the sea, 
back on alert against enemy raiders." 


It was a paved track, a path that kept them 

in marching order. Their mail-shirts glinted, 
hard and hand-linked; the high-gloss iron 

of their armour rang. So they duly arrived 

in their grim war-graith and gear at the hall, 
and, weary from the sea, stacked wide shields 
of the toughest hardwood against the wall, 
then collapsed on the benches; battle-dress 
and weapons clashed. They collected their spears 
in a seafarers' stook, a stand of greyish 
tapering ash. And the troops themselves 

were as good as their weapons. 

Then a proud warrior 
questioned the men concerning their origins: 
“Where do you come from, carrying these 
decorated shields and shirts of mail, 


BEONWULF 


They arrive at 
Heorot 


23 


340 


350 


360 


24 


here-sceafta héap? Ic eom Hrddgares 
ar ond ombiht. Ne seah ic elbéodige 
pus manige men  modiglicran. 
Wen’ ic bet ge for wlenco, nalles for wr&c-sidum, 
ac for hige-brymmum Hrddgar sohton." 
Him pà ellen-rof andswarode, 
wlanc Wedera léod, word efter sprec, 
heard under helme: “We synt Higelaces 3j 
béod-genéatas; Bēowulf is min nama. 
Wille ic 4secgan sunu Healfdenes, 
mérum béodne min &rende, 
aldre pinum, gif he tis geunnan wile, 
pet wē hine swa godne  grétan moton." 
Wulfgàr mabelode: pat wes Wendla léod, 
wes his mód-sefa manegum gecyóed, 
wig ond wisdom: “Ic bes wine Deniga 
fréan Scildinga frīnan wille, 
béaga bryttan, swà pü béna eart, 
péoden m&rne, ymb pinne sid, 350 
ond bé bà andsware dre gecyóan, 
ðe mē se goda  agifan benceó." 
Hwearf bà hredlice, pr Hroógar sæt, 
eald ond unhar mid his eorla gedriht; 
eode ellen-rof, bet hé for eaxlum gestod 
Deniga fréan: cüpe hē dugude béaw. 
Wulfgar madelode to his wine-drihtne: 
“Her syndon geferede, feorran cumene 
ofer geofenes begang Géata léode; 
bone yldestan óoret-mecgas 


360 


BEOWULF 


these cheek-hinged helmets and javelins? 

I am Hrothgar’s herald and officer. 

I have never seen so impressive or large 

an assembly of strangers. Stoutness of heart, 

bravery not banishment, must have brought you to 
Hrothgar.” 


The man whose name was known for courage, 
the Geat leader, resolute in his helmet, 
answered in return: “We are retainers 

from Hygelac’s band. Beowulf is my name. 

If your lord and master, the most renowned 
son of Halfdane, will hear me out 

and graciously allow me to greet him in person, 
I am ready and willing to report my errand.” 


Wulfgar replied, a Wendel chief 

renowned as a warrior, well known for his wisdom 
and the temper of his mind: “I will take this message, 
in accordance with your wish, to our noble king, 

our dear lord, friend of the Danes, 

the giver of rings. I will go and ask him 

about your coming here, then hurry back 

with whatever reply it pleases him to give.” 


With that he turned to where Hrothgar sat, 
an old man among retainers; 

the valiant follower stood four-square 

in front of his king: he knew the courtesies. 
Wulfgar addressed his dear lord: 

“People from Geatland have put ashore. 
They have sailed far over the wide sea. 
They call the chief in charge of their band 


BEOWULF 


Beowulf announces 
his name 


Formalities are 
observed 


25 


370 


390 


26 


Beowulf nemnað; hy benan synt, 

bat hie, beoden min, wid bé moton 

wordum wrixlan. No 60 him wearne getéoh 

Oinra gegn-cwida, gled-man Hrodgar: 

hy on wig-getawum wyrde pincead 

eorla geehtlan; hüru se aldor déah, 

sé b&m heado-rincum — hider wisade." 
Hroógar mapelode, helm Scyldinga: 

“Ic hine cide  cniht-wesende; 

wees his eald-feeder Ecgbéo haten, 

öm to ham forgeaf Hrébel Géata 

angan dohtor, is his eafora nū 

heard hér cumen, sōhte holdne wine. 

Donne segdon bet sé-lipende, 

pa ðe gif-sceattas Géata fyredon 

pyder tō bance, pet hé pritiges 

manna megen-creft on his mund-gripe, 

heapo-rof hebbe. Hine halig God 

for ar-stafum tis onsende 

to West-Denum, pes ic wen hebbe, 

wid Grendles gryre. Ic bm gódan sceal 

for his méd-prece | mádmas béodan. 

Béo 6t on ofeste, hat in gan, 

ston sibbe-gedriht samod etgedere; 

gesaga him éac wordum pet hie sint wil-cuman 

Deniga léodum!” Pa tō dura healle 

Wulfgar eode, word inne abéad: 

Eow hét secgan  sige-drihten min, 

aldor East-Dena, pet hē éower zpelu can: 

ond gé him syndon ofer s®-wylmas, 

heard-hicgende,  hider wil-cuman. 


BEOWULF 


370 


380 


390 


by the name of Beowulf. They beg, my lord, 

an audience with you, exchange of words 

and formal greeting. Most gracious Hrothgar, 

do not refuse them, but grant them a reply. 

From their arms and appointment, they appear well born 
and worthy of respect, especially the one 

who has led them this far: he is formidable indeed." 


Hrothgar, protector of Shieldings, replied: 
“I used to know him when he was a young boy. 
His father before him was called Ecgtheow. 
Hrethel the Geat gave Ecgtheow 
his daughter in marriage. This man is their son, 
here to follow up an old friendship. 
A crew of seamen who sailed for me once 
with a gift-cargo across to Geatland 
returned with marvellous tales about him: 
a thane, they declared, with the strength of thirty 
in the grip of each hand. Now Holy God 
has, in His goodness, guided him here 
to the West-Danes, to defend us from Grendel. 
This is my hope; and for his heroism 
I will recompense him with a rich treasure. 
Go immediately, bid him and the Geats 
he has in attendance to assemble and enter. 
Say, moreover, when you speak to them, 
they are welcome to Denmark." 

At the door of the hall, 
Wulfgar duly delivered the message: 
^My lord, the conquering king of the Danes, 
bids me announce that he knows your ancestry; 
also that he welcomes you here to Heorot 
and salutes your arrival from across the sea. 


BEOWULF 


Hrothgar recognizes 
Beowulf’s name and 
approves his arrival 


27 


400 


420 


28 


Nut ge moton gangan in éowrum giid-getawum, 
under here-griman, Hrddgar geseon; 

lētað hilde-bord hér onbidan, 

wudu, wzl-sceaftas, worda gepinges.” 

Aras pa serica, ymb hine rinc manig, 
prjólic þegna heap; sume þēr bidon, 
heado-réaf héoldon, swāã him se hearda bebéad. 
Snyredon ztsomne, pa secg wisode, 
under Heorotes hrof; éode hilde-déor, 
heard under helme, bat hé on héode gestod. 
Beowulf madelode —on him byrne scan, 
searo-net seowed smipes orpancum 

“Wes pu, Hroógàr, hal! Ic eom Higelaces 
még ond mago-degn; hæbbe ic mé&rda fela 
ongunnen on geogobe. Mē weard Grendles ping 
on minre ébel-tyrf undyrne cüó; 
secgaó s&-lidend, bat pes sele stande, 
reced sélesta, rinca gehwylcum 
1del ond unnyt, siddan &fen-leoht 
under heofenes hador  beholen weorpeó. 

Pa mé bat gelárdon eode mine, 

pa sélestan, snotere ceorlas, 

beoden Hroógar, pet ic pe sohte, 

forpan hie megenes creft mine cüpon: 
selfe ofersawon, 064 ic of searwum cwom, 
fah from feondum,  b&r ic fife geband, 
yóde eotena cyn, ond on yóum slog 
niceras nihtes, nearo-bearfe dréah, 

wrec Wedera nid —wéan ahsodon— 
forgrand gramum: ond nu wid Grendel sceal, 
wid bam aglécan āna gehégan 

ding wid pyrse. Ic pe nū da, 


BEOWULF 


410 


420 


You are free now to move forward 

to meet Hrothgar, in helmets and armour, 

but shields must stay here and spears be stacked 
until the outcome of the audience is clear.” 


The hero arose, surrounded closely 

by his powerful thanes. A party remained 

under orders to keep watch on the arms; 

the rest proceeded, led by their prince 

under Heorot's roof. And standing on the hearth 
in webbed links that the smith had woven, 

the fine-forged mesh of his gleaming mail-shirt, 
resolute in his helmet, Beowulf spoke: 
“Greetings to Hrothgar. I am Hygelac’s kinsman, 
one of his hall-troop. When I was younger, 

I had great triumphs. Then news of Grendel, 
hard to ignore, reached me at home: 

sailors brought stories of the plight you suffer 

in this legendary hall, how it lies deserted, 
empty and useless once the evening light 

hides itself under heaven's dome. 

So every elder and experienced councilman 
among my people supported my resolve 

to come here to you, King Hrothgar, 

because all knew of my awesome strength. 

They had seen me boltered in the blood of enemies 
when I battled and bound five beasts, 

raided a troll-nest and in the night-sea 
slaughtered sea-brutes. I have suffered extremes 
and avenged the Geats (their enemies brought it 
upon themselves, I devastated them). 

Now I mean to be a match for Grendel, 

settle the outcome in single combat. 


BEOWULF 


Beowulf enters 
Heorot. He gives an 
account of his heroic 
exploits 


He declares he will 
fight Grendel 


29 


430 


440 


450 


30 


brego Beorht-Dena,  biddan wille, 

eodor Scyldinga, Anre bene: 

pet 60 mé ne forwyrne, wigendra hléo, 

fréo-wine folca, nū ic pus feorran cóm, 

pzt ic mōte āna ond minra eorla gedryht, 

pes hearda heap, Heorot f#lsian. 

Hebbe ic éac geahsod, pet se gl&ca 

for his won-hydum wépna ne recceó. 

Ic pet bonne forhicge, swa me Higelac sie, 

min mon-drihten, modes blide, 

bat ic sweord bere opóe sidne scyld, 

geolo-rand tō güpe; ac ic mid grape sceal 

fon wid feonde ond ymb feorh sacan, 

laó wid labum; ðær gelyfan sceal 

Dryhtnes dome së pe hine déad nimed. 

Wen' ic pet hé wille, gif hé wealdan mot, 

in p&m güó-sele Géotena léode 

etan unforhte, swa he oft dyde, 

megen hréó-manna. Na pü minne pearft 

hafalan hydan, ac hé mē habban wile 

dréore fahne, gif mec déad nimeó; 

byreó blodig wel, byrgean penced; 

eted an-genga  unmurnflice, 

mearcaó mor-hopu; no ğü ymb mines ne pearft 

lices feorme  leng sorgian. 

Onsend Higelàce, gif mec hild nime, 

beadu-scrüda betst, bat mine bréost wered, 

hregla selest; batis Hrédlan laf, 

Welandes geweorc. G&ð à wyrd swa hio scel!" 
Hroógar mapelode, helm Scyldinga: 

“For were-fyhtum pt, wine min Béowulf, 

ond for àr-stafum —üsic sohtest. 


BEOWULF 


430 


440 


450 


And so, my request, O king of Bright-Danes, 
dear prince of the Shieldings, friend of the people 
and their ring of defence, my one request 

is that you won't refuse me, who have come this far, 
the privilege of purifying Heorot, 

with my own men to help me, and nobody else. 
I have heard moreover that the monster scorns 
in his reckless way to use weapons; 

therefore, to heighten Hygelac’s fame 

and gladden his heart, I hereby renounce 

sword and the shelter of the broad shield, 

the heavy war-board: hand-to-hand 

is how it will be, a life-and-death 

fight with the fiend. Whichever one death fells 
must deem it a just judgement by God. 

If Grendel wins, it will be a gruesome day; 

he will glut himself on the Geats in the war-hall, 
swoop without fear on that flower of manhood 
as on others before. Then my face won't be there 
to be covered in death: he will carry me away 

as he goes to ground, gorged and bloodied; 

he will run gloating with my raw corpse 

and feed on it alone, in a cruel frenzy, 

fouling his moor-nest. No need then 

to lament for long or lay out my body: 

if the battle takes me, send back 

this breast-webbing that Weland fashioned 

and Hrethel gave me, to Lord Hygelac. 

Fate goes ever as fate must." 


Hrothgar, the helmet of Shieldings, spoke: 
“Beowulf, my friend, you have travelled here 
to favour us with help and to fight for us. 


BEOWULF 


Hrothgar recollects a 
friendship and tells 
of Grendel's raids 


31 


470 


480 


32 


Gesloh pin feder fæhðe mé&ste, 

wearp he Heapolafe to hand-bonan 

mid Wilfingum; 064 hine wara cyn 

for here-brogan habban ne mihte. 

Panon hé gesohte Std-Dena folc 

ofer ða gewealc, Ar-Scyldinga; 

6a ic furpum wéold folce Deniga 

ond on geogode héold grimme-tice, 
hord-burh helepa; 6a wes Heregar dead, 
min yldra mēg unlifigende, 

bearn Healfdenes; sé wes betera donne ic! 
Siddan pa féhde feo pingode; 

sende ic Wylfingum ofer weteres hrycg 
ealde madmas; hē mē āþas swor. 

Sorh is mē tō secganne on sefan minum 
gumena ngum, hwet mé Grendel hafaó 
hynóo on Heorote mid his hete-pancum, 
fér-nida gefremed; is min flet-werod, 
wig-héap gewanod; hie wyrd forswéop 
on Grendles gryre. God éabe meg 

pone dol-sceaóan dé&da getwafan! 

Ful oft gebéotedon béore druncne 

ofer ealo-wdge dret-mecgas, 

bat hie in béor-sele bidan woldon 
Grendles güpe mid gryrum ecga. 

Donne wes béos medo-heal on morgen-tid, 
driht-sele dréor-fah, ponne deg lixte, 

eal benc-pelu  blode bestymed, 

heall heoru-dréore; āhte ic holdra py læs 
dēorre duguðe, þē pa déad fornam. 


BEOWULF 


460 


470 


480 


There was a feud one time, begun by your father. 
With his own hands he had killed Heatholaf, 

who was a Wulfing; so war was looming 

and his people, in fear of it, forced him to leave. 
He came away then over rolling waves 

to the South-Danes here, the sons of honour. 

I was then in the first flush of kingship, 
establishing my sway over all the rich strongholds 
of this heroic land. Heorogar, 

my older brother and the better man, 

also a son of Halfdane’s, had died. 

Finally I healed the feud by paying: 

I shipped a treasure-trove to the Wulfings 

and Ecgtheow acknowledged me with oaths of allegiance. 


“It bothers me to have to burden anyone 
with all the grief Grendel has caused 
and the havoc he has wreaked upon us in Heorot, 
our humiliations. My household-guard 
are on the wane, fate sweeps them away 
into Grendel's clutches— 
but God can easily 
halt these raids and harrowing attacks! 


"Time and again, when the goblets passed 

and seasoned fighters got flushed with beer 

they would pledge themselves to protect Heorot 
and wait for Grendel with whetted swords. 

But when dawn broke and day crept in 

over each empty, blood-spattered bench, 

the floor of the mead-hall where they had feasted 
would be slick with slaughter. And so they died, 
faithful retainers, and my following dwindled. 


BEOWULF 33 


490 


500 


510 


34 


Site nū tō symle, ond on s&l meoto 
sige hreó-secga, swa pin sefa hwette!” 490 

Pa wes Géat-mecgum geador etsomne 
on béor-sele benc gerymed; 
b&érswió-ferhpe  sittan eodon, 
prydum dealle; begn nytte behéold, 
sé be on handa ber  hroden ealo-w&ge, 
scencte scir-wered; scop hwilum sang 
hador on Heorote; p#r wes heleda dream, 
duguó unl¥tel Dena ond Wedera. 

Unferó mapelode, Ecglafes bearn, 
be æt fotum set — frean Scyldinga, 
onband beadu-rüne: wes him Béowulfes sid, 
modges mere-faran, micel efpunca, 500 
forpon pe hē ne tbe, pat nig dder man 
&fre mérda bon mā  middan-geardes 
gehédde under heofenum  ponne hé sylfa: 
“Eart pü se Beowulf, sé pe wid Brecan wunne, 
on sidne s& ymb sund flite, 
Or git for wlence wada cunnedon 
ond for dol-gilpe on déop water 
aldrum nébdon? Nē inc nig mon, 
ne leof ne 140, beléan mihte 
sorh-fullne sid, pa git on sund reon; 510 
b&r git éagor-stream earmum pehton, 
mëton mere-stré&ta, mundum brugdon, 
glidon ofer gar-secg. Geofon ypum wéol, 
wintrys wylmum; git on weteres ht 
seofon niht swuncon; he pe zt sunde oferflàt, 
heefde mare megen; bà hine on morgen-tid 
on Heapo-R&mes holm up etber. 


BEOWULF 


“Now take your place at the table, relish 
the triumph of heroes to your heart's content.” 


Then a bench was cleared in that banquet hall 
so the Geats could have room to be together 
and the party sat, proud in their bearing, 
strong and stalwart. An attendant stood by 
with a decorated pitcher, pouring bright 
helpings of mead. And the minstrel sang, 
filling Heorot with his head-clearing voice, 
gladdening that great rally of Geats and Danes. 


From where he crouched at the king’s feet, 
Unferth, a son of Ecglaf’s, spoke 

contrary words. Beowulf’s coming, 

his sea-braving, made him sick with envy: 
he could not brook or abide the fact 

that anyone else alive under heaven 

might enjoy greater regard than he did: 

“Are you the Beowulf who took on Breca 

in a swimming match on the open sea, 
risking the water just to prove that you could win? 
It was sheer vanity made you venture out 
on the main deep. And no matter who tried, 
friend or foe, to deflect the pair of you, 
neither would back down: the sea-test obsessed you. 
You waded in, embracing water, 

taking its measure, mastering currents, 
riding on the swell. The ocean swayed, 
winter went wild in the waves, but you vied 
for seven nights; and then he outswam you, 
came ashore the stronger contender. 

He was cast up safe and sound one morning 


BEOWULF 


A feast in Heorot 


Unferth strikes a 
discordant note 


Unferth’s version of 
a swimming contest 


35 


530 


540 


550 


36 


Donon hé gesóhte  swasne eóel, 

léof his leodum, lond Brondinga, 
freodo-burh fegere, pér hē folc ahte, 
burh ond béagas. Béot eal wid be 

sunu Béanstanes sdde geléste. 

Donne wene ic to be wyrsan gepingea, 
6éah bü heado-résa_  gehwir dohte, 
grimre gude, gif bü Grendles dearst 
niht-longne fyrst nean bidan." 

Beowulf mapelode, bearn Ecgbéowes: 
*Hwzet bü worn fela, wine min Unferó, 
béore druncen ymb Brecan spré&ce, 
segdest from his side! | SoÓ ic talige 
pet ic mere-strengo  maran āhte, 
earfebo on Ypum, donne &nig dper man. 
Wit pet gecw&don cniht-wesende 
ond gebéotedon —wéron bégen pa git 
on geogod-féore— pet wit on gar-secg üt 
aldrum néddon; ond bet geefndon swa. 


Hefdon swurd nacod, pa wit on sund réon, 


heard on handa; wit unc wid hron-fixas 
werian pohton; nó hé wiht fram mē 
flod-ypum feor fléotan meahte, 

hrabor on holme, nō ic fram him wolde. 
Da wit etsomne on sē wéron 

fif nihta fyrst, oppet unc flod todraf, 
wado weallende, wedera cealdost, 
nipende niht, ond norpan-wind 
heado-grim ondhwearf. Hréo w&ron yba, 
wes mere-fixa mod onhrered. 

Pēr mē wid ladum  lic-syrce min, 

heard, hond-locen, helpe gefremede, 


BEOWULF 


520 


530 


550 


among the Heathoreams, then made his way 
to where he belonged in Bronding country, 
home again, sure of his ground 

in strongroom and bawn. So Breca made good 
his boast upon you and was proved right. 

No matter, therefore, how you may have fared 
in every bout and battle until now, 

this time you'll be worsted; no one has ever 
outlasted an entire night against Grendel." 


Beowulf, Ecgtheow's son, replied: 

“Well, friend Unferth, you have had your say 
about Breca and me. But it was mostly beer 
that was doing the talking. The truth is this: 
when the going was heavy in those high waves, 
I was the strongest swimmer of all. 

We'd been children together and we grew up 
daring ourselves to outdo each other, 

boasting and urging each other to risk 

our lives on the sea. And so it turned out. 

Each of us swam holding a sword, 

a naked, hard-proofed blade for protection 
against the whale-beasts. But Breca could never 
move out farther or faster from me 

than I could manage to move from him. 
Shoulder to shoulder, we struggled on 

for five nights, until the long flow 

and pitch of the waves, the perishing cold, 
night falling and winds from the north 

drove us apart. The deep boiled up 

and its wallowing sent the sea-brutes wild. 

My armour helped me to hold out; 

my hard-ringed chain-mail, hand-forged and linked, 


BEOWULF 


Beowulf corrects 
Unferth 


37 


579 


580 


38 


beado-hregl bróden on bréostum leg 
golde gegyrwed. Mé to grunde téah 
fah féond-scada, fæste hefde 
grim on grape; hwzpre me gyfebe wearó, 
pet ic Agl@can orde geré&hte, 
hilde-bille; heapo-r&s fornam 
mihtig mere-deor þurh mine hand. 
“Swa mec gelome  laóo-geteonan 
préatedon pearle; ic him penode 
déoran sweorde, swa hit gedefe wes. 
Næs hie dre fylle geféan hefdon, 
man-fordédlan, pet hie mē pégon, 
symbel ymbseton  s&-grunde néah; 
ac on mergenne mécum wunde 
be yó-lafe uppe légon, 
sweordum aswefede, pet syópan na 
ymb brontne ford _brim-lidende 
lade ne letton. Léoht éastan com, 
beorht béacen Godes; brimu swabredon 
pet ic s®-n&ssas geséon mihte, 
windige weallas. Wyrd oft nered 
unfégne eorl, bonne his ellen déah. 
Hwzpere mé ges&lde, pet ic mid sweorde ofsloh 
niceras nigene. NO ic on niht gefregn 
under heofones hwealf  heardran feohtan, 
ne on ég-streamum . earmran mannon. 
Hwzpere ic fara feng  feore gedigde, 
sipes wérig. Da mec sē opbzr, 
flód æfter farode on Finna land, 
wadu weallendu. No ic wiht fram pe 
swylcra searo-nida secgan hyrde, 


BEOWULF 


560 


570 


580 


a fine, close-fitting filigree of gold, 

kept me safe when some ocean creature 

pulled me to the bottom. Pinioned fast 

and swathed in its grip, I was granted one 

final chance: my sword plunged 

and the ordeal was over. Through my own hands, 
the fury of battle had finished off the sea-beast. 


“Time and again, foul things attacked me, 
lurking and stalking, but I lashed out, 
gave as good as I got with my sword. 
My flesh was not for feasting on, 
there would be no monsters gnawing and gloating 
over their banquet at the bottom of the sea. 
Instead, in the morning, mangled and sleeping 
the sleep of the sword, they slopped and floated 
like the ocean’s leavings. From now on 
sailors would be safe, the deep-sea raids 
were over for good. Light came from the east, 
bright guarantee of God, and the waves 
went quiet; I could see headlands 
and buffeted cliffs. Often, for undaunted courage, 
fate spares the man it has not already marked. 
However it occurred, my sword had killed 
nine sea-monsters. Such night-dangers 
and hard ordeals I have never heard of 
nor of a man more desolate in surging waves. 
But worn out as I was, I survived, 
came through with my life. The ocean lifted 
and laid me ashore, I landed safe 
on the coast of Finland. 

Now I cannot recall 
any fight you entered, Unferth, 


BEOWULF 


Beowulf tells of his 
ordeal in the sea 


39 


590 


600 


40 


billa brogan. Breca n&fre git 

æt heado-lace, ne gehweber incer, 

swa déorlice  d&d gefremede 

fagum sweordum . —no ic bes fela gylpe— 
béah óü pinum broórum tō banan wurde, 
héafod-m&gum; pes pi in helle scealt 
werhóo dreogan, péah pin wit duge. 

Secge ic bé to sōðe, sunu Ecglafes, 

pet nēfre Grendel swa fela gryra gefremede, 
atol €gléca_  ealdre pinum, 

hynóo on Heorote, gif bin hige wire, 

sefa swà searo-grim, swa bü self talast; 

ac he hafaó onfunden, pet he pa féhde ne pearf, 
atole ecg-brece Gower léode 

swide onsittan, Sige-Scyldinga. 

Nymeó nyd-bade, n&negum araó 

leode Deniga, ac hē lust wiged, 

swefed ond sendep, secce ne weneb 

to Gar-Denum. Ac ic him Geata sceal 


590 


eafoó ond ellen ungeàra nū, 
gübe gebeodan. Gé&p eft sé be mot 
to medo modig, sipban morgen-léoht 
ofer ylda bearn  opres dogores, 
sunne swegl-wered  süpan scined!” 

bà wæs on sālum  sinces brytta, 
gamol-feax ond güó-rof; geoce gelyfde 
brego Beorht-Dena,  gehyrde on Béowulfe 
folces hyrde  fzsst-r&dne gepoht. 
Dér wes helepa hleahtor, hlyn swynsode, 
word wéron wynsume. ode Wealhpeow ford, 
cwén Hróógàres, cynna gemyndig; 
grétte gold-hroden guman on healle, 


BEOWULF 


that bears comparison. I don’t boast when I say 
that neither you nor Breca were ever much 
celebrated for swordsmanship 

or for facing danger on the field of battle. 

You killed your own kith and kin, 

so for all your cleverness and quick tongue, 

you will suffer damnation in the depths of hell. 
The fact is, Unferth, if you were truly 

as keen or courageous as you claim to be 

Grendel would never have got away with 

such unchecked atrocity, attacks on your king, 
havoc in Heorot and horrors everywhere. 

But he knows he need never be in dread 

of your blade making a mizzle of his blood 

or of vengeance arriving ever from this quarter— 
from the Victory-Shieldings, the shoulderers of the spear. 
He knows he can trample down you Danes 

to his heart’s content, humiliate and murder 
without fear of reprisal. But he will find me different. 
I will show him how Geats shape to kill 

in the heat of battle. Then whoever wants to 

may go bravely to mead, when morning light, 
scarfed in sun-dazzle, shines forth from the south 
and brings another daybreak to the world.” 


Then the grey-haired treasure-giver was glad; 
far-famed in battle, the prince of Bright-Danes 
and keeper of his people counted on Beowulf, 
on the warrior’s steadfastness and his word. 

So the laughter started, the din got louder 

and the crowd was happy. Wealhtheow came in, 
Hrothgar’s queen, observing the courtesies. 
Adorned in her gold, she graciously saluted 


BEOWULF 


Unferth rebuked. 
Beowulf reaffirms his 
determination to 
defeat Grendel 


Wealhtheow, 
Hrothgar's queen, 
graces the banquet 


41 


630 


640 


42 


ond pa fréolic wif ful gesealde 

&rest East-Dena ébel-wearde; 

bed hine blidne et b&re beor-pege, 
leodum léofne; hé on lust gepeah 
symbel ond sele-ful, sige-róf kyning. 
Ymb-éode ba ides Helminga 

dugupe ond geogobe dēl &ghwylcne, 
sinc-fato sealde, oppat sil alamp, 
pet hio Beowulfe, béag-hroden cwén 
mode gepungen, medo-ful ætbær. 
Grétte Géata léod, gode pancode 


wis-fest wordum, pes ðe hire se willa gelamp, 


pet héo on &nigne eorl gelyfde 
fyrena frofre. He pet ful gebeah, 
wel-réow wiga, zt Wealhpeon, 
ond pa gyddode  güpe gefysed; 
Beowulf mapelode, bearn Ecgpéowes: 
“Ic pet hogode, à ic on holm gestah, 
s&-bat geset mid minra secga gedriht, 
pet ic 4nunga éowra léoda 
willan geworhte, opóe on wel crunge, 
feond-gràpum fest. Ic gefremman sceal 
eorlic ellen, opde ende-deg 
on bisse meodu-healle minne gebidan.’ 
Dam wife bà word wel licodon, 
gilp-cwide Géates; ēode gold-hroden 
fréolicu folc-cwen tō hire fréan sittan. 
bà wæs eft swā zr inne on healle 
bryó-word sprecen, déod on s&lum, 
sige-folca sweg, oþþæt semninga 


, 


BEOWULF 


630 


640 


the men in hall, then handed the cup 

first to Hrothgar, their homeland’s guardian, 

urging him to drink deep and enjoy it 

because he was dear to them. And he drank it down 
like the warlord he was, with festive cheer. 

So the Helming woman went on her rounds, 
queenly and dignified, decked out in rings, 

offering the goblet to all ranks, 

treating the household and the assembled troop 
until it was Beowulf's turn to take it from her hand. 
With measured words she welcomed the Geat 

and thanked God for granting her wish 

that a deliverer she could believe in would arrive 
to ease their afflictions. He accepted the cup, 

a daunting man, dangerous in action 

and eager for it always. He addressed Wealhtheow; 
Beowulf, son of Ecgtheow, said: 


“I had a fixed purpose when I put to sea. 

As I sat in the boat with my band of men, 

I meant to perform to the uttermost 

what your people wanted or perish in the attempt, 
in the fiend's clutches. And I shall fulfil that purpose, 
prove myself with a proud deed 

or meet my death here in the mead-hall." 


This formal boast by Beowulf the Geat 
pleased the lady well and she went to sit 
by Hrothgar, regal and arrayed with gold. 


Then it was like old times in the echoing hall, 
proud talk and the people happy, 
loud and excited; until soon enough 


BEOWULF 


Beowulf's formal 
boast 


Hrothgar leaves 
Heorot in Beowulf's 


keeping 


43 


650 


660 


670 


44 


sunu Healfdenes sēcean wolde 
&fen-reste. Wiste bm ahlécan 

to þēm héah-sele hilde gepinged, 

siddan hie sunnan léoht geséon meahton, 
op de nipende niht ofer ealle, 
scadu-helma gesceapu  scrióan cwoman 
wan under wolcnum. Werod eall ras. 
Gegrétte ba guma operne, 

Hroógar Béowulf, ond him h&l abéad, 
win-emes geweald, ond bet word àcwzeó: 
“Néfre ic &negum men  &r alyfde, 
sipdan ic hond ond rond  hebban mihte, 
Oryp-zrn Dena  büton be nū 6a. 

Hafa nū ond geheald husa selest: 
gemyne m&rpo, megen-ellen cyó, 

waca wid wrapum! Ne bid bé wilna gad 
gif bü bet ellen-weorc aldre gedigest.” 


Da him Hropgar gewat mid his helepa gedryht, 


eodur Scyldinga üt of healle; 

wolde wig-fruma Wealhbéo sécan, 

cwen tō gebeddan. Hefde kyning-wuldor 
Grendle togéanes, swa guman gefrungon, 
sele-weard aseted; sundor-nytte behéold 
ymb aldor Dena, eoton-weard’ abéad. 
Hüru Géataléod  georne truwode 

modgan megnes, Metodes hyldo. 

Da hé him of dyde i1sern-byrnan, 

helm of hafelan, sealde his hyrsted sweord, 
jrena cyst ombiht-pegne, 

ond gehealdan hét  hilde-geatwe. 

Gesprec ba se góda — gylp-worda sum, 
Béowulf Géata,  &r he on bed stige: 


BEOWULF 


650 


670 


Halfdane’s heir had to be away 

to his night's rest. He realized 

that the demon was going to descend on the hall, 
that he had plotted all day, from dawn-light 

until darkness gathered again over the world 

and stealthy night-shapes came stealing forth 
under the cloud-murk. The company stood 

as the two leaders took leave of each other: 
Hrothgar wished Beowulf health and good luck, 
named him hall-warden and announced as follows: 
“Never, since my hand could hold a shield 

have I entrusted or given control 

of the Danes’ hall to anyone but you. 

Ward and guard it, for it is the greatest of houses. 
Be on your mettle now, keep in mind your fame, 
beware of the enemy. There’s nothing you wish for 
that won't be yours if you win through alive." 


Hrothgar departed then with his house-guard. 
The lord of the Shieldings, their shelter in war, 
left the mead-hall to lie with Wealhtheow, 

his queen and bedmate. The King of Glory 

(as people learned) had posted a lookout 

who was a match for Grendel, a guard against monsters, 
special protection to the Danish prince. 

And the Geat placed complete trust 

in his strength of limb and the Lord's favour. 
He began to remove his iron breast-mail, 

took off the helmet and handed his attendant 
the patterned sword, a smith's masterpiece, 
ordering him to keep the equipment guarded. 
And before he bedded down, Beowulf, 

that prince of goodness, proudly asserted: 


BEOWULF 


Beowulf renounces 
the use of weapons 


45 


690 


700 


46 


“Nō ic me an here-wesmun  hnàgran talige 
güp-geweorca ponne Grendel hine; 
forpan ic hine sweorde  swebban nelle, 
aldre beneotan, þēah ic eal mege. 

Nat he bara góda, pat he mē ongean slea, 
rand geheawe,  béah de he rof sie 
nip-geweorca: ac wit on niht sculon 
secge ofersittan, gif hē gesécean dear 

wig ofer w&pen: ond sibdan witig God 
on swa hwepere hond, halig Dryhten, 
mérdo deme, swa him gemet pince." 
Hylde hine pa heabo-déor, hleor-bolster onfeng 
eorles andwlitan, ond hine ymb monig 
snellic s&-rinc — sele-reste gebéah. 

N&nig heora pohte, pat he panon scolde 
eft eard-lufan  &fre gesécean, 

folc opóe fréo-burh, þēr he afeded wes; 
ac hie hefdon gefrünen, pat hie &r to fela micles 
in b&m win-sele wæl-dēað fornam, 
Denigea leode. Ac him Dryhten forgeaf 
wig-spéda gewiofu, Wedera leodum, 
frofor ond fultum, pet hie féond heora 
6urh anes creft ealle ofercomon, 

selfes mihtum. | Soó is gecybed, 

pet mihtig God manna cynnes 

weold wide-ferhd. Com on wanre niht 
scridan sceadu-genga; scéotend swéfon, 
bà pet horn-reced  healdan scoldon, 

ealle büton ánum. Pet wes yldum cüb, 
pet hie ne moste, bà Metod nolde, 
sesyn-scaba under sceadu bregdan, 


BEOWULF 


700 


“When it comes to fighting, I count myself 

as dangerous any day as Grendel. 

So it won't be a cutting edge I'll wield 

to mow him down, easily as I might. 

He has no idea of the arts of war, 

of shield or sword-play, although he does possess 
a wild strength. No weapons, therefore, 

for either this night: unarmed he shall face me 
if face me he dares. And may the Divine Lord 
in His wisdom grant the glory of victory 

to whichever side He sees fit." 


Then down the brave man lay with his bolster 
under his head and his whole company 
of sea-rovers at rest beside him. 
None of them expected he would ever see 
his homeland again or get back 
to his native place and the people who reared him. 
They knew too well the way it was before, 
how often the Danes had fallen prey 
to death in the mead-hall. But the Lord was weaving 
a victory on His war-loom for the Weather-Geats. 
Through the strength of one they all prevailed; 
they would crush their enemy and come through 
in triumph and gladness. The truth is clear: 
Almighty God rules over mankind 
and always has. 

Then out of the night 
came the shadow-stalker, stealthy and swift; 
the hall-guards were slack, asleep at their posts, 
all except one; it was widely understood 
that as long as God disallowed it, 
the fiend could not bear them to his shadow-bourne. 


BEONWULF 


The Gents await 
Grendel's attack 


47 


730 


48 


ac hē weccende wrabum on andan 

bad bolgen-mod  beadwa gepinges. 
Dàcomofmore under mist-hleopum 

Grendel gongan, Godes yrre bær, 

mynte se mān-scaða manna cynnes 

sumne besyrwan in sele bam héan. 


Wod under wolcnum, tō pes þe hē win-reced, 


gold-sele gumena gearwost wisse, 
féttum fahne. Ne wes pet forma sid 
pet hé Hropgares hàm gesohte. 

Néfre he on aldor-dagum  &r né sipdan 
heardran h&le heal-degnas fand. 

Com pa tō recede  rinc sidian 
dréamum bed&led. Duru sona onarn 


fyr-bendum fest, sypóan he hire folmum gehran: 


onbr&d pa bealo-hydig, 6a he gebolgen wes, 
recedes müpan. Rabe efter pon 

on fagne flor f€ond treddode, 

eode yrre-mod; him of éagum stod 

ligge gelicost leoht unféger. 

Geseah hē in recede  rinca manige, 

swefan sibbe-gedriht samod etgedere, 
mago-rinca héap. Pa his mod ahlog; 

mynte pet hé ged&lde, Ær pon deg cwome, 
atolagl&éca, ānra gehwylces 

lif wid lice, pba him alumpen wes 

wist-fylle wen. Ne wes bet wyrd ba gen, 
pet hë ma mōste manna cynnes 

Oicgean ofer bà niht. Pryó-swyó beheold, 
még Higelaces, hū se man-scada 

under f&r-gripum gefaran wolde. 


BEOWULF 


730 


One man, however, was in fighting mood, 
awake and on edge, spoiling for action. 


In off the moors, down through the mist bands 
God-cursed Grendel came greedily loping. 
The bane of the race of men roamed forth, 
hunting for a prey in the high hall. 
Under the cloud-murk he moved towards it 
until it shone above him, a sheer keep 
of fortified gold. Nor was that the first time 
he had scouted the grounds of Hrothgar’s dwelling— 
although never in his life, before or since, 
did he find harder fortune or hall-defenders. 
Spurned and joyless, he journeyed on ahead 
and arrived at the bawn. The iron-braced door 
turned on its hinge when his hands touched it. 
Then his rage boiled over, he ripped open 
the mouth of the building, maddening for blood, 
pacing the length of the patterned floor 
with his loathsome tread, while a baleful light, 
flame more than light, flared from his eyes. 
He saw many men in the mansion, sleeping, 
a ranked company of kinsmen and warriors 
quartered together. And his glee was demonic, 
picturing the mayhem: before morning 
he would rip life from limb and devour them, 
feed on their flesh; but his fate that night 
was due to change, his days of ravening 
had come to an end. 

Mighty and canny, 
Hygelac's kinsman was keenly watching 
for the first move the monster would make. 
Nor did the creature keep him waiting 


BEOWULF 


Grendel strikes 


A Geat warrior 
perishes 


49 


740 


750 


760 


779 


50 


Ne pet se 4gléca yldan pohte, 

ac hē gefeng hraóe forman side ‘ 
slépendne rinc, slat unwearnum, 

bat ban-locan, blöd édrum dranc, 
syn-snédum swealh; sóna hefde 
unlyfigendes eal gefeormod, 

fet ond folma. Ford near zetstop, 

nam pa mid handa  hige-pihtigne 

rinc on reste —r&hte ongean 

féond mid folme; hē onfeng hrape 
inwit-bancum ond wid earm gesæt. 

Sona pet onfunde  fyrena hyrde, 

bat hé ne métte middan-geardes, 

eorpan scéatta on elran men 

mund-gripe maran; hē on mode weard 
forht on ferhde; nö py ër fram meahte. 
Hyge wes him hin-fls, wolde on heolster fléon, 
sécan déofla gedreg; ne wes his drohtod p&r, 
swylce he on ealder-dagum  &r gemétte. 
Gemunde pa se goda még Higelaces 
&fen-spréce, up-lang astod 

ond him fæste widféng; fingras burston: 
eoten wes ütweard, eorl furpur stop. 
Mynte se mēra,  p&r hē meahte swa, 
widre gewindan ond on weg banon 

fléon on fen-hopu; wiste his fingra geweald 
on grames grapum; pet wes géocor sid 
pet se hearm-scaba tō Heorute ateah. 
Dryht-sele dynede, Denum eallum wearó, 
ceaster-büendum, cénra gehwylcum, 
eorlum ealu-scerwen. Yrre w&ron bégen, 
répe ren-weardas. Reced hlynsode; 

bà wes wundor micel, pat se win-sele 


BEOWULF 


740 


750 


779 


but struck suddenly and started in; 

he grabbed and mauled a man on his bench, 

bit into his bone-lappings, bolted down his blood 
and gorged on him in lumps, leaving the body 
utterly lifeless, eaten up 

hand and foot. Venturing closer, 

his talon was raised to attack Beowulf 

where he lay on the bed; he was bearing in 

with open claw when the alert hero's 

comeback and armlock forestalled him utterly. 
The captain of evil discovered himself 

in a handgrip harder than anything 

he had ever encountered in any man 

on the face of the earth. Every bone in his body 
quailed and recoiled, but he could not escape. 
He was desperate to flee to his den and hide 
with the devil's litter, for in all his days 

he had never been clamped or cornered like this. 
Then Hygelac's trusty retainer recalled 

his bedtime speech, sprang to his feet 

and got a firm hold. Fingers were bursting, 

the monster back-tracking, the man overpowering. 
The dread of the land was desperate to escape, 
to take a roundabout road and flee 

to his lair in the fens. The latching power 

in his fingers weakened; it was the worst trip 
the terror-monger had taken to Heorot. 

And now the timbers trembled and sang, 

a hall-session that harrowed every Dane 

inside the stockade: stumbling in fury, 

the two contenders crashed through the building. 
The hall clattered and hammered, but somehow 
survived the onslaught and kept standing: 


BEOWULF 


Beowulf's fight with 
Grendel 


51 


780 


799 


800 


52 


widhzfde heapo-deorum, pet hé on hrüsan ne feol, 
féger fold-bold; ac he bes fæste wes 
innan ond ütan iren-bendum 
searo-boncum besmipod. bér fram sylle abeag 
medu-benc monig, mine gefr&ge, 
golde geregnad, b&r pa graman wunnon. 
Pes ne wendon ær witan Scyldinga, 
pet hit à mid gemete manna nig, 
betlic ond ban-fag  tobrecan meahte, 780 
listum tolücan, nymbe liges febm 
swulge on swabule. Swég up astag 
niwe geneahhe, Nord-Denum stod 
atelic egesa, anra gehwylcum 
para pe of wealle wōp gehjrdon, 
gryre-leoó galan Godes andsacan, 
sige-léasne sang, sar wanigean 
helle hefton. Héold hine fæste, 
sé be manna wes megene strengest 
on bim dege bysses lifes. 
Nolde eorla hleo  &nige þinga 790 
pone cwealm-cuman cwicne forlētan, 
né his līf-dagas lēoda &nigum 
nytte tealde. bé&r genehost bregd 
eorl Béowulfes  ealde lafe, 
wolde fréa-drihtnes feorh ealgian, 
mares béodnes, Or hie meahton swa. 
Hie bet ne wiston, pba hie gewin drugon, 
heard-hicgende — hilde-mecgas, 
ond on healfa gehwone héawan pohton, 
sawle sécan: bone syn-scadan 800 
&nig ofereorban irenna cyst, 


BEOWULF 


it was handsomely structured, a sturdy frame 
braced with the best of blacksmith’s work 

inside and out. The story goes 

that as the pair struggled, mead-benches were smashed 
and sprung off the floor, gold fittings and all. 
Before then, no Shielding elder would believe 
there was any power or person upon earth 
capable of wrecking their horn-rigged hall 

unless the burning embrace of a fire 

engulf it in flame. Then an extraordinary 

wail arose, and bewildering fear 

came over the Danes. Everyone felt it 

who heard that cry as it echoed off the wall, 

a God-cursed scream and strain of catastrophe, 
the howl of the loser, the lament of the hell-serf 
keening his wound. He was overwhelmed, 
manacled tight by the man who of all men 

was foremost and strongest in the days of this life. 


But the earl-troop’s leader was not inclined 

to allow his caller to depart alive: 

he did not consider that life of much account 

to anyone anywhere. Time and again, 

Beowulf’s warriors worked to defend 

their lord’s life, laying about them 

as best they could with their ancestral blades. 

Stalwart in action, they kept striking out 

on every side, seeking to cut 

straight to the soul. When they joined the struggle 

there was something they could not have known at the 
time, 

that no blade on earth, no blacksmith’s art 

could ever damage their demon opponent. 


BEOWULF 


Beowulf's thanes 
defend him 


53 


830 


54 


gud-billa nan grétan nolde, 

ac hē sige-w&pnum forsworen hefde, 
ecga gehwylcre. Scolde his aldor-gedal 
on 6&m dege  bysses lifes 

earmlic wurdan, ond se ellor-gast 

on féonda geweald feor sidian. 

Da pet onfunde sē pe fela ror 

modes myrde manna cynne, 

fyrene gefremede —hé fag wid God— 
bat him se lic-homa 1éstan nolde, 

ac hine se médega még Hygelaces 
hefde be honda; wes gehweper oórum 
lifigende 146. Lic-sar gebad 

atol €gl@ca; him on eaxle weard 
syn-dolh sweotol; seonowe onsprungon, 
burston ban-locan. Béowulfe weard 
güó-hreà gyfepe; scolde Grendel ponan 
feorh-séoc fleon under fen-hleodu, 
secean wyn-léas wic; wiste be geornor, 
pet his aldres wes ende gegongen, 
dogera deg-rim. Denum eallum weard 
efter bam wel-rése willa gelumpen. 


Hefde bà gefélsod, sé be &r feorran com, 


snotor ond swyd-ferhd, sele Hrodgares, 
genered wid nide. Niht-weorce gefeh, 
ellen-mérpum. Hefde East-Denum 
Géat-mecga leod  gilp gel&sted, 

swylce oncybóe ealle gebétte, 
inwid-sorge, pe hie &r drugon 

ond for brea-nydum  bolian scoldon, 
torn unlytel. Pat wes tàcen sweotol, 
sybóan hilde-déor hond alegde, 


BEOWULF 


830 


He had conjured the harm from the cutting edge 
of every weapon. But his going away 

out of this world and the days of his life 

would be agony to him, and his alien spirit 
would travel far into fiends’ keeping. 


Then he who had harrowed the hearts of men 
with pain and affliction in former times 

and had given offence also to God 

found that his bodily powers failed him. 
Hygelac’s kinsman kept him helplessly 

locked in a handgrip. As long as either lived, 

he was hateful to the other. The monster’s whole 
body was in pain, a tremendous wound 
appeared on his shoulder. Sinews split 

and the bone-lappings burst. Beowulf was granted 
the glory of winning; Grendel was driven 

under the fen-banks, fatally hurt, 

to his desolate lair. His days were numbered, 

the end of his life was coming over him, 

he knew it for certain; and one bloody clash 

had fulfilled the dearest wishes of the Danes. 
The man who had lately landed among them, 
proud and sure, had purged the hall, 

kept it from harm; he was happy with his nightwork 
and the courage he had shown. The Geat captain 
had boldly fulfilled his boast to the Danes: 

he had healed and relieved a huge distress, 
unremitting humiliations, 

the hard fate they’d been forced to undergo, 

no small affliction. Clear proof of this 

could be seen in the hand the hero displayed 
high up near the roof: the whole of Grendel’s 


BEOWULF 


Grendel is defeated, 
Beowulf fulfils his 
boast 


55 


840 


850 


860 


56 


earm ond eaxle —pbér wes eal geador 
Grendles grape— under géapne hrof. 
Da wes on morgen, mine gefr&ge, 
ymb pà gif-healle  güó-rinc monig; 
férdon folc-togan feorran ond nean 
geond wid-wegas wundor scéawian, 
lapes lastas. Nō his lif-gedal 840 
sarlic pühte secga €negum, 
para pe tir-léases trode sceawode, 
hū hē wérig-mod on weg banon, 
nióa ofercumen, on nicera mere, 
fge ond geflymed —feorh-lastas ber. 
Dér wes on blode brim weallende, 
atol yóa geswing, eal gemenged, 
haton heolfre, heoro-dréore wéol; 
déad-fege deog, siddan dréama léas 
in fen-freodo  feorh alegde, 850 
hé&pene sawle; pér him hel onféng. 
Panon eft gewiton eald-gesidas, 
swylce geong manig of gomen-wabe, 
fram mere modge méarum ridan, 
beornas on blancum. Dé&r w&s Béowulfes 
mérdo mé&ned; monig oft gecwxd, 
petto sid nē nord be sæm twéonum 
ofer eormen-grund oper n&nig 
under swegles begong  selra n&re 
rond-hebbendra, rices wyróra. 
Ne hie hüru wine-drihten wiht ne logon, 860 
gledne Hroógàr, ac bet wes god cyning. 
Hwilum heapo-rofe  hleapan leton, 


BEOWULF 


shoulder and arm, his awesome grasp. 


Then morning came and many a warrior 
gathered, as I’ve heard, around the gift-hall, 
clan-chiefs flocking from far and near 

down wide-ranging roads, wondering greatly 

at the monster’s footprints. His fatal departure 
was regretted by no-one who witnessed his trail, 
the ignominious marks of his flight 

where he’d skulked away, exhausted in spirit 
and beaten in battle, bloodying the path, 
hauling his doom to the demons’ mere. 

The bloodshot water wallowed and surged, 
there were loathsome upthrows and overturnings 
of waves and gore and wound-slurry. 

With his death upon him, he had dived deep 
into his marsh-den, drowned out his life 

and his heathen soul: hell claimed him there. 


Then away they rode, the old retainers 
with many a young man following after, 

a troop on horseback, in high spirits 

on their bay steeds. Beowulf’s doings 
were praised over and over again. 
Nowhere, they said, north or south 
between the two seas or under the tall sky 
on the broad earth was there anyone better 
to raise a shield or to rule a kingdom. 

Yet there was no laying of blame on their lord, 
the noble Hrothgar; he was a good king. 


At times the war-band broke into a gallop, 
letting their chestnut horses race 


BEOWULF 


The morning after: 
relief and rejoicings 


57 


870 


880 


890 


58 


on geflit faran fealwe méaras, 

öğr him fold-wegas fægere pühton, 
cystum cide; hwilum cyninges þegn, 
guma gilp-hleden, gidda gemyndig, 

sé de eal-fela | eald-gesegena 

worn gemunde, word Oper fand 

sdde gebunden. Secg eft ongan 

sid Beowulfes | snyttrum styrian 

ond on spéd wrecan spel gerade, 
wordum wrixlan. Wel-hwylc gecwed, 
pat hé fram Sigemunde  secgan hyrde, 
ellen-dédum, | uncüpes fela, 

Welsinges gewin, wide sidas, 

para pe gumena bearn gearwe ne wiston, 
fehde ond fyrena, biiton Fitela mid hine, 
bonne hē swulces hwat | secgan wolde, 
éam his nefan, swà hie à wéron 

zt nida gehwam — nyd-gesteallan; 

hefdon eal-fela eotena cynnes 

sweordum geséged. Sigemunde gesprong 
efter déad-dege dom unlytel, 

sybóan wiges heard wyrm acwealde, 
hordes hyrde. Hé under harne stan, 
zbelinges bearn, āna geneóde 

frécne déde; ne wes him Fitela mid; 
hwepre him ges&lde, det pet swurd purhwod 
wrétlicne wyrm, pet hit on wealle zstod, 
dryhtlic iren; draca moróre swealt. 
Hefde agléca_ elne gegongen, 

pat hé béah-hordes brūcan moste 


BEOWULF 


870 


wherever they found the going good 
on those well-known tracks. Meanwhile, a thane 
of the king’s household, a carrier of tales, 
a traditional singer deeply schooled 
in the lore of the past, linked a new theme 
to a strict metre. The man started 
to recite with skill, rehearsing Beowulf's 
triumphs and feats in well-fashioned lines, 
entwining his words. 

He told what he’d heard 
repeated in songs about Sigemund’s exploits, 
all of those many feats and marvels, 
the struggles and wanderings of Waels’s son, 
things unknown to anyone 
except to Fitela, feuds and foul doings 
confided by uncle to nephew when he felt 
the urge to speak of them: always they had been 
partners in the fight, friends in need. 
They killed giants, their conquering swords 
had brought them down. 


After his death 
Sigemund's glory grew and grew 
because of his courage when he killed the dragon, 
the guardian of the hoard. Under grey stone 
he had dared to enter all by himself 
to face the worst without Fitela. 
But it came to pass that his sword plunged 
right through those radiant scales 
and drove into the wall. The dragon died of it. 
His daring had given him total possession 
of the treasure hoard, his to dispose of 
however he liked. He loaded a boat: 


BEOWULF 


Hrothgar’s minstrel 
sings about Beowulf 


The tale of 
Sigemund, the 
dragon-stayer. 
Appropriate for 
Beowulf, who has 
defeated Grendel 


59 


910 


60 


selfes dome; sé-bat gehleod, 
ber on bearm scipes  beorhte fraetwa, 
Weelses eafera; wyrm hat gemealt. 
Se was wreccena wide mérost 
ofer wer-béode, wigendra hléo, 
ellen-d#dum —hé bes &r ondah— 
siddan Heremodes hild sweórode, 
eafoó ond ellen; hē mid eotenum wearó 
on feonda geweald ford forlacen 
snüde forsended. Hine sorh-wylmas 
lemede to lange; hē his léodum wearó, 
eallum zpellingum tō aldor-ceare. 
Swylce oft bemearn ran mælum 
swid-ferhpes siÓ  snotor ceorl monig, 
sē be him bealwa to bote gelyfde, 
pet pet óeodnes bearn gepéon scolde, 
feder-epelum onfon, folc gehealdan, 
hord ond hléo-burh, hæleþa rice, 
édel Scyldinga. Hé pir eallum wearó, 
még Higelaces, manna cynne, 
freondum gefegra; hine fyren onwod. 
Hwilum flitende — fealwe str&te 
mearum méton. Da wes morgen-léoht 
scofen ond scynded. Eode scealc monig 
swid-hicgende to sele bam héan, 
searo-wundor seon; swylce self cyning 
of bryd-büre, béah-horda weard, 
tryddode tir-feest getrume micle, 
cystum gecybed, ond his cwen mid him 
medo-stigge mat | mzgpa hose. 


BEOWULF 


920 


Waels's son weighted her hold 
with dazzling spoils. The hot dragon melted. 


Sigemund's name was known everywhere. 

He was utterly valiant and venturesome, 

a fence round his fighters and flourished therefore 
after King Heremod’s prowess declined 

and his campaigns slowed down. The king was betrayed, 
ambushed in Jutland, overpowered 

and done away with. The waves of his grief 

had beaten him down, made him a burden, 

a source of anxiety to his own nobles: 

that expedition was often condemned 

in those earlier times by experienced men, 

men who relied on his lordship for redress, 

who presumed that the part of a prince was to thrive 
on his father's throne and defend the nation, 

the Shielding land where they lived and belonged, 
its holdings and strongholds. Such was Beowulf 

in the affection of his friends and of everyone alive. 
But evil entered into Heremod. 


Meanwhile, the Danes kept racing their mounts 
down sandy lanes. The light of day 

broke and kept brightening. Bands of retainers 
galloped in excitement to the gabled hall 

to see the marvel; and the king himself, 

guardian of the ring-hoard, goodness in person, 
walked in majesty from the women’s quarters 
with a numerous train, attended by his queen 

and her crowd of maidens, across to the mead-hall. 


When Hrothgar arrived at the hall, he spoke, 


BEOWULF 


King Heremod 
remembered and 
contrasted with 
Beowulf 


61 


930 


940 


950 


62 


Hroógar mapelode —hē tō healle geong, 
stod on stapole, geseah stéapne hrof 
golde fahne ond Grendles hond: 

“Disse ansyne  Al-wealdan banc 
lungre gelimpe! Fela ic lapes gebad, 
grynna æt Grendle; à meg God wyrcan 930 
wunder zfter wundre, wuldres Hyrde. 
Det wes ungeara, pet ic nigra me 
wéana ne wende tō widan feore 
bote gebidan, ponne blode fah 
hüsa selest  heoro-drerig stod, 
wea wid-scofen  witena gehwylcum 
Oara be ne wéndon, pet hie wide-ferhd 
leoda land-geweorc lapum beweredon 
scuccum ond scinnum. Nii scealc hafaó 
burh Drihtnes miht  d&d gefremede, 940 
ðe we ealle  &r ne meahton 
snyttrum besyrwan. Hwæt, bet secgan meg 
efne swa hwylc megba, swā done magan cende 
efter gum-cynnum, gyf heo gýt lyfad, 
pet hyre Eald-metod este w&re 
bearn-gebyrdo. Nu ic, Beowulf, pec, 
secg betsta, mé for sunu wylle 
fréogan on ferhpe;  heald ford tela 
niwe sibbe. Ne bid be n&nigre gad 
worolde wilna, pé ic geweald hebbe. 950 
Ful oft ic for lēssan lean teohhode, 
hord-weorpunge  hnàhran rince, 
sémran æt secce. Pū pe self hafast 
d&dum gefremed, bet pin dom lyfad 
awa to aldre. Al-walda pec 
gode forgylde, swā he nū gýt dyde!" 


BEOWULF 


standing on the steps, under the steep eaves, 
gazing at the roofwork and Grendel's talon: 
"First and foremost, let the Almighty Father 

be thanked for this sight. I suffered a long 
harrowing by Grendel. But the Heavenly Shepherd 
can work His wonders always and everywhere. 
Not long since, it seemed I would never 

be granted the slightest solace or relief 

from any of my burdens: the best of houses 
glittered and reeked and ran with blood. 

This one worry outweighed all others— 

a constant distress to counsellors entrusted 
with defending the people's forts from assault 
by monsters and demons. But now a man, 

with the Lord's assistance, has accomplished something 
none of us could manage before now 

for all our efforts. Whoever she was 

who brought forth this flower of manhood, 

if she is still alive, that woman can say 

that in her labour the Lord of Ages 

bestowed a grace on her. So now, Beowulf, 

I adopt you in my heart as a dear son. 

Nourish and maintain this new connection, 
you noblest of mer; there'll be nothing you'll want for, 
no worldly goods that won't be yours. 

I have often honoured smaller achievements, 
recognized warriors not nearly as worthy, 
lavished rewards on the less deserving. 

But you have made yourself immortal 

by your glorious action. May the God of Ages 
continue to keep and requite you well." 


Beowulf, son of Ecgtheow, spoke: 


BEOWULF 


King Hrothgar gives 
thanks for the relief 
of Heorot and adopts 
Beowulf “in his 
heart” 


63 


979 


980 


64 


Béowulf mapelode, bearn Ecgbéowes: 
We pet ellen-weorc é&stum miclum, 
feohtan fremedon,  frecne genéddon 
eafod uncüpes. Ube ic swipor, 
pet óü hine selfne geséon moste, 
feond on fretewum — fyl-werigne! 

Ic hine hredlice heardan clammum 
on wel-bedde wripan pohte, 

pet hé for mund-gripe minum scolde 
licgean lif-bysig, bütan his lic swice. 
Ic hine ne mihte, pé Metod nolde, 


ganges getwáman, nō ic him pes georne etfealh, 


feorh-genidlan; wes tō fore-mihtig 


feond on fepe. Hwebere hē his folme forlet 


to lif-wrabe last weardian, 

earm ond eaxle; no p&r nige swa þēah 
feasceaft guma — frofre gebohte; 

no py leng leofaó 146-getéona 

synnum geswenced, ac hyne sar hafaó 
in nid-gripe  nearwe befongen, 

balwon bendum; ðær abidan sceal 

maga mane fah  miclan domes, 

hü him scir Metod  scrifan wille." 

Da wes swigra secg, sunu Ecglafes, 
on gylp-spr&ce giid-geweorca, 
sipóan epelingas eorles crefte 
ofer héanne hrof hand sceawedon, 
féondes fingras. Foran &ghwylc wes, 
steda negla gehwylc style gelicost, 
há&penes hand-sporu, hilde-rinces 
egl unhéoru. Æghwylc gecwed 
pet him heardra nan hrinan wolde 


BEOWULF 


“We have gone through with a glorious endeavour 
and been much favoured in this fight we dared 
against the unknown. Nevertheless, 

if you could have seen the monster himself 

where he lay beaten, I would have been better pleased. 
My plan was to pounce, pin him down 

in a tight grip and grapple him to death— 

have him panting for life, powerless and clasped 
in my bare hands, his body in thrall. 

But I couldn't stop him from slipping my hold. 
The Lord allowed it, my lock on him 

wasn't strong enough, he struggled fiercely 

and broke and ran. Yet he bought his freedom 

at a high price, for he left his hand 

and arm and shoulder to show he had been here, 

a cold comfort for having come among us. 

And now he won't be long for this world. 

He has done his worst but the wound will end him. 
He is hasped and hooped and hirpling with pain, 
limping and looped in it. Like a man outlawed 

for wickedness, he must await 

the mighty judgement of God in majesty." 


There was less tampering and big talk then 
from Unferth the boaster, less of his blather 
as the hall-thanes eyed the awful proof 

of the hero's prowess, the splayed hand 

up under the eaves. Every nail, 

claw-scale and spur, every spike 

and welt on the hand of that heathen brute 
was like barbed steel. Everybody said 

there was no honed iron hard enough 

to pierce him through, no time-proofed blade 


BEOWULF 


Beowulf's account of 
the fight 


The trophy: 
Grendel's shoulder 
and claw 


65 


1000 


1010 


66 


iren &r-god, bet des ahl&can 
blodge beadu-folme onberan wolde. 

Da wes haten hrebe  Heort innanweard 990 
folmum gefretwod; fela bra wes, 
wera ond wifa, be bet win-reced, 
gest-sele gyredon. Gold-fag scinon 
web efter wagum, wundor-siona fela 
secga gehwylcum para be on swylc staraó. 
Wes bet beorhte bold — tobrocen swide, 
eal inneweard | 1ren-bendum fest, 
heorras tohlidene; hrof àna genes 
ealles ansund, pé se aglé&ca 
fyren-dédum fag on fléam gewand, 1000 
aldres orwéna. Nō pet yóe byd 
to befléonne —fremme sé pe wille— 
ac gesécan sceal sawl-berendra 
nyde genydde, nibda bearna, 
grund-büendra  gearwe stowe, 
bér his lic-homa, ]leger-bedde fest, 
swefep efter symle. 

bà wes sil ond mél 

bat to healle gang  Healfdenes sunu; 
wolde self cyning  symbel bicgan. 
Ne gefregen ic bà m&gbe | máran weorode 1010 
ymb hyra sinc-gyfan | sel gebéran. 
Bugon pa to bence bl&d-agande, 
fylle gefégon; fegere geb&gon 
medo-ful manig — mágas para, 
swió-hicgende, on sele bam héan, 
Hroógár ond Hropulf. Heorot innan wes 


fréondum àfylled; nalles facen-stafas 


BEOWULF 


that could cut his brutal, blood-caked claw. 


Then the order was given for all hands 
to help to refurbish Heorot immediately: epee 
men and women thronging the wine-hall, 
getting it ready. Gold thread shone 
in the wall-hangings, woven scenes 
that attracted and held the eye’s attention. 
But iron-braced as the inside of it had been, 
that bright room lay in ruins now. 
The very doors had been dragged from their hinges. 
Only the roof remained unscathed 
by the time the guilt-fouled fiend turned tail 
in despair of his life. But death is not easily 
escaped from by anyone: 
all of us with souls, earth-dwellers 
and children of men, must make our way 
to a destination already ordained 
where the body, after the banqueting, 
sleeps on its deathbed. 
Then the due time arrived A victory feast 
for Halfdane’s son to proceed to the hall. 
The king himself would sit down to feast. 
No group ever gathered in greater numbers 
or better order around their ring-giver. 
The benches filled with famous men 
who fell to with relish; round upon round 
of mead was passed; those powerful kinsmen, 
Hrothgar and Hrothulf, were in high spirits 
in the raftered hall. Inside Heorot 
there was nothing but friendship. The Shielding nation 
was not yet familiar with feud and betrayal. 


BEOWULF 67 


The damaged hall 


1020 


1030 


1040 


1050 


68 


P€od-Scyldingas 
Forgeaf ba Beowulfe brand Healfdenes ibas 

segen gyldenne sigores to léane, 

hroden hilde-cumbor, helm ond byrnan; 

máre madpum-sweord manige gesawon 

beforan beorn beran. Beowulf gepah 

ful on flette; nō he b&re feoh-gyfte 

for sceotendum — scamigan Gorfte. 


benden fremedon. 


Ne gefregn ic fréondlicor feower madmas 
golde gegyrede gum-manna fela 
in ealo-bence öðrum gesellan. 
Ymb bes helmes hrof  heafod-beorge tos 
wirum bewunden walu ütan héold, 
pet him fela lafe frēcne ne meahton 
scür-heard scepóan, bonne scyld-freca 
ongéan gramum gangan scolde. 
Heht 64 eorla hléo eahta méaras 
fated-hleore on flet téon, 
in under eoderas; para ànum stod 
sadol swearwum fah, since gewurpad. 
Pet wes hilde-setl héah-cyninges, 
donne sweorda gelac sunu Healfdenes 1040 
efnan wolde; n&fre on ore leg 
wid-cüpes wig, donne walu feollon. 
Ond 6a Beowulfe bēga gehwepres 
eodor Ingwina | onweald getéah, 
wicga ond wapna; hēt hine wel brücan. 
Swa manlice mre beoden, 
hord-weard helepa heabo-résas geald 
méarum ond madmum, swa hy néfre man lyhó, 
sē be secgan wile sōð efter rihte. 
Da gyt &ghwylcum  eorla drihten 


1050 


BEOWULF 


Then Halfdane’s son presented Beowulf Victory gifts 


with a gold standard as a victory gift, presentea:to Bene 
an embroidered banner; also breast-mail 

and a helmet; and a sword carried high, 

that was both precious object and token of honour. 
So Beowulf drank his drink, at ease; 

it was hardly a shame to be showered with such gifts 
in front of the hall-troops. There haven’t been many 
moments, I am sure, when men exchanged 

four such treasures at so friendly a sitting. 

An embossed ridge, a band lapped with wire 
arched over the helmet: head-protection 

to keep the keen-ground cutting edge 

from damaging it when danger threatened 

and the man was battling behind his shield. 

Next the king ordered eight horses 

with gold bridles to be brought through the yard 
into the hall. The harness of one 

included a saddle of sumptuous design, 

the battle-seat where the son of Halfdane 

rode when he wished to join the sword-play: 
wherever the killing and carnage were the worst, 
he would be to the fore, fighting hard. 

Then the Danish prince, descendant of Ing, 

handed over both the arms and the horses, 

urging Beowulf to use them well. 

And so their leader, the lord and guard 

of coffer and strongroom, with customary grace 
bestowed upon Beowulf both sets of gifts. 

A fair witness can see how well each one behaved. 


The other Geats are 
rewarded 


The chieftain went on to reward the others: 
each man on the bench who had sailed with Beowulf 


BEOWULF 69 


para pe mid Béowulfe brim-lade téah, 
on bá&re medu-bence | mapóum gesealde, 
yrfe-lafe, ond pone nne heht 
golde forgyldan, pone de Grendel ær 
mane àcwealde, swa he hyra mà wolde, 
nefne him witig God wyrd forstode 
ond das mannes mod. Metod eallum wéold 
gumena cynnes, swā hē nū git déd. 
Forpan bið andgit é#ghweer selest, 

1060 ferhdes fore-panc. Fela sceal gebidan 
léofes ond lapes, sé pe longe hér 
on dyssum win-dagum — worolde brūceð. 

bár was sang ond sweg samod etgedere 

fore Healfdenes  hilde-wisan, 
gomen-wudu gréted, gid oft wrecen, 
Gonne heal-gamen Hrdpgares scop 
æfter medo-bence ménan scolde: — 
Finnes eaferum, 084 hie se fær begeat, 
heled Healf-Dena, Hnæf Scyldinga, 

1070 in Frés-wele feallan scolde. 
Né hüru Hildeburh  herian porfte 
eotena tréowe; unsynnum weard 
beloren léofum et bam lind-plegan 
bearnum ond broórum; hie on gebyrd hruron 
gare wunde; bat wes geomuru ides. 


70 BEOWULF 


1070 


and risked the voyage received a bounty, 

some treasured possession. And compensation, 
a price in gold, was settled for the Geat 
Grendel had cruelly killed earlier— 

as he would have killed more, had not mindful God 
and one man’s daring prevented that doom. 
Past and present, God's will prevails. 

Hence, understanding is always best 

and a prudent mind. Whoever remains 

for long here in this earthly life 

will enjoy and endure more than enough. 


They sang then and played to please the hero, 
words and music for their warrior prince, 
harp tunes and tales of adventure: 

there were high times on the hall benches 
and the king's poet performed his part 

with the saga of Finn and his sons, unfolding 
the tale of the fierce attack in Friesland 

where Hnaef, king of the Danes, met death. 


Hildeburh 

had little cause 
to credit the Jutes: 

son and brother, 
she lost them both 

on the battlefield. 
She, bereft 

and blameless, they 
foredoomed, cut down 

and spear-gored. She, 
the woman in shock, 

waylaid by grief, 


BEOWULF 


Another performance 
by the minstrel 


Hildeburh, a Danish 
princess married to 
the Frisian King 
Finn, loses her son 
(unnamed here) and 
her brother Hnaef in 
a fight at Finn’s hall 


71 


1080 


1090 


72 


Nalles holinga  Hoces dohtor 

meotodsceaft bemearn, sypdan morgen com, 
04 h&o under swegle geséon meahte 
morpor-bealo maga, þēr héo ær mieste héold 
worolde wynne. Wig ealle fornam 

Finnes begnas, nemne féaum anum, 

bat hé ne mehte on p&m meóel-stede 

wig Hengeste wiht gefeohtan, 

né bà wéa-lafe wige forpringan, 

péodnes degne; ac hig him gepingo budon, 
bat hie him oder flet eal gerymdon, 

healle ond héah-setl, þæt hie healfre geweald 
wid eotena bearn agan moston, 

ond zt feoh-gyftum Folcwaldan sunu 

dogra gehwylce Dene weorpode, 

Hengestes héap hringum wenede 

efne swa swide, sinc-gestreonum 


BEOWULF 


1080 


1090 


Hoc’s daughter — 

how could she not 
lament her fate 

when morning came 
and the light broke 

on her murdered dears? 
And so farewell 

delight on earth, 
war carried away 

Finn's troop of thanes, 
all but a few. 

How then could Finn 
hold the line 

or fight on 
to the end with Hengest, 

how save 
the rump of his force 

from that enemy chief? 
So a truce was offered 

as follows: first 
separate quarters 

to be cleared for the Danes, 
hall and throne 


to be shared with the Frisians. 


Then, second: 

every day 
at the dole-out of gifts 

Finn, son of Focwald, 
should honour the Danes, 

bestow with an even 
hand to Hengest 

and Hengest's men 
the wrought-gold rings, 


BEOWULF 


The Danish attack is 
bloody but 
indecisive. Hnaef is 
killed, Hengest takes 
charge and makes a 
truce with Finn and 
the Frisians 


74 


f&ttan goldes, swa he Fresena cyn 

on béor-sele byldan wolde. 

Da hie getruwedon on twa healfa 

fæste friodu-wére. Fin Hengeste 

elne unflitme | adum benemde 

pet hé pa wéa-lafe weotena dome 

arum héolde, pat ðr nig mon 

wordum nē worcum ware ne brace, 

né burh inwit-searo #fre gemé&nden, 

óeah hie hira beag-gyfan banan folgedon 

Oéoden-léase, pa him swa gepearfod wes; 

gyf ponne Frysna hwylc frēcnen spréce 

ózs morpor-hetes myndgiend ware, 

bonne hit sweordes ecg syddan scolde. 
Að wes geefned, ond icge gold 

ahefen of horde: Here-Scyldinga 


BEOWULF 


bounty to match 
the measure he gave 

his own Frisians— 
to keep morale 

in the beer-hall high. 
Both sides then 

sealed their agreement. 
With oaths to Hengest 

Finn swore 
openly, solemnly, 

that the battle survivors 
would be guaranteed 

honour and status. 
No infringement 

by word or deed, 
no provocation 

would be permitted. 
Their own ring-giver 

after all 
was dead and gone, 

they were leaderless, 
in forced allegiance 

to his murderer. 
So if any Frisian 

stirred up bad blood 
with insinuations 

or taunts about this, 
the blade of the sword 

would arbitrate it. 
A funeral pyre 

was then prepared, 
effulgent gold 

brought out from the hoard. 


BEOWULF 


The Danish 
survivors to be 
quartered and given 
parity of treatment 
with the Frisians 
and their allies, the 
Jutes 


The bodies of the 
slain burnt on the 


pyre 


75 


1110 


1120 


76 


betst beado-rinca wes on b&l gearu. 
Æt b&m ade wes  ep-gesyne 
swat-fah syrce, swyn eal-gylden, 
eofer iren-heard, æpþeling manig 


wundum 4wyrded; sume on wzle crungon. 


Het 6a Hildeburh et Hnefes ade 

hire selfre sunu sweoloóe befestan, 
ban-fatu bernan ond on bél don. 
Earme on eaxle ides gnornode, 
geomrode giddum. | Güó-rinc astah; 
wand tó wolcnum | wzl-fyra mest, 
hlynode for hlàwe;  hafelan multon, 
bén-geato burston, donne blöd etspranc, 
laó-bite lices. Lig ealle forswealg, 
g&sta gifrost, para de p&r gid fornam 
béga folces; wes hira bl&d scacen. 


BEOWULF 


1110 


1120 


The pride and prince 

of the Shieldings lay 
awaiting the flame. 

Everywhere 
there were blood-plastered 

coats of mail. 
The pyre was heaped 

with boar-shaped helmets 
forged in gold, 

with the gashed corpses 
of well-born Danes — 

many had fallen. 
Then Hildeburh 

ordered her own 
son’s body 

be burnt with Hnaef's, 
the flesh on his bones 

to sputter and blaze 
beside his uncle's. 

The woman wailed 
and sang keens, 

the warrior went up. 
Carcass flame 

swirled and fumed, 
they stood round the burial 

mound and howled 
as heads melted, 

crusted gashes 
spattered and ran 

bloody matter. 
The glutton element 

flamed and consumed 
the dead of both sides. 


BEOWULF 


77 


1130 


1140 


78 


Gewiton him 64 wigend — wica néosian 
fréondum befeallen, Frys-land geséon, 
hamas ond héa-burh. Hengest 64 gýt 
wel-fagne winter wunode mid Finne 
eal unhlitme; eard gemunde, 
béah pe ne meahte on mere drifan 
hringed-stefnan; holm storme wéol, 
won wid winde; winter ybe beléac 
1s-gebinde, opózt ober com 
gear in geardas, swā nū gyt deó, 
pa de syngales sele bewitiad, 
wuldor-torhtan weder. Da wes winter scacen, 
feger foldan bearm; fundode wrecca, 
gist of geardum; hē to gyrn-wrece 
swidor bohte bonne to s&-lade, 
gif he torn-gemot  purhteon mihte, 
pet hé eotena bearn inne gemunde. 


BEOWULF 


Their great days were gone. 
Warriors scattered 
to homes and forts 
all over Friesland, 
fewer now, feeling 
loss of friends. 
Hengest stayed, The Danes, homesick 
lived out that whole ee 
resentful, blood-sullen 
1130 winter with Finn, 
homesick and helpless. 
No ring-whorled prow 
could up then 
and away on the sea. 
Wind and water 
raged with storms, 
wave and shingle 
were shackled in ice 
until another year 
appeared in the yard 
as it does to this day, 
the seasons constant, 
the wonder of light 
coming over us. 
Then winter was gone, Spring comes 
earth’s lap grew lovely, 
longing woke 
in the cooped-up exile 
for a voyage home — 
1140 but more for vengeance, 
some way of bringing 
things to a head: 
his sword arm hankered 


BEOWULF 79 


1150 


80 


Swa he ne forwyrnde worold-rédenne, 
bonne him Hünlafing  hilde-leoman, 

billa sélest, on bearm dyde, 

bes wéron mid eotenum ecge cüóe. 
Swylce ferhó-frecan Fin eft begeat 
sweord-bealo sliden æt his selfes hàm, 
sipóan grimne gripe  Güdlaf ond Oslaf 
sfters&-siÓe sorge mé&ndon, 

etwiton weana dēl; ne meahte wéfre mod 
forhabban in hrebre. Da wes heal roden 
féonda feorum,  swilce Fin slegen, 

cyning on corpre, ond seo cwen numen. 
Scéotend Scyldinga tō scypon feredon 

eal in-gesteald eord-cyninges, 

swylce hie æt Finnes ham findan meahton 
sigla, searo-gimma. Hie on s&-lade 
drihtlice wif tō Denum feredon, 

léddon to leodum. 


BEOWULF 


1150 


to greet the Jutes. 

So he did not balk 
once Hunlafing 

placed on his lap 
Dazzle-the-Duel, 

the best sword of all, 
whose edges Jutes 

knew only too well. 
Thus blood was spilled, 

the gallant Finn 
slain in his home 

after Guthlaf and Oslaf 
back from their voyage 

made old accusation: 
the brutal ambush, 

the fate they had suffered, 
all blamed on Finn. 

The wildness in them 
had to brim over. 

The hall ran red 
with blood of enemies. 

Finn was cut down, 
the queen brought away 

and everything 
the Shieldings could find 

inside Finn's walls — 
the Frisian king's 

gold collars and gemstones — 
swept off to the ship. 

Over sea-lanes then 
back to Daneland 

the warrior troop 
bore that lady home. 


BEOWULF 


Danish warriors 
spur themselves to 
renew the feud. Finn 
is killed, his 
stronghold looted, 
his widow, 
Hildeburh, carried 
back to Denmark 


81 


1160 


1170 


1180 


82 


Lé&oÓ wes asungen, 
gleo-mannes gyd. Gamen eft astah, 
beorhtode benc-sweg,  byrelas sealdon 
win of wunder-fatum. ba cwom Wealhpeo ford 
gan under gyldnum béage, pr ba gddan twegen 
s&ton suhterge-federan; pa gýt wes hiera sib etgedere, 
zghwylc öðrum trywe. Swylce b&r Unferp pyle 
æt fotum set frean Scyldinga; gehwylc hiora his ferhpe 

treowde, 

pet hé hefde mod micel, péah be hē his magum nére 
ar-fest et ecga gelacum. Sprec 0a ides Scyldinga: 
“Onfoh pissum fulle, freo-drihten min, 
sinces brytta; pi on s&lum wes, 
gold-wine gumena, ond tō Géatum sprec 
mildum wordum, swā sceal man don; 
béo wid Géatas gled, geofena gemyndig, 
néan ond feorran þū nū hafast. 
Mē man segde, pet pü dé for sunu wolde 
here-rinc habban. Heorot is gef&lsod, 
béah-sele beorhta; brüc, benden bü mote, 
manigra medo, ond binum magum lef 
folc ond rice, bonne di ford scyle, 
metodsceaft séon. Ic minne can 
gledne Hropulf, pat he pa geogode wile 
ārum healdan, gyf þū &r bonne he, 
wine Scildinga, worold ofl&test; 
wene ic bet he mid gode  gyldan wille 
uncran eaferan, gif hé pet eal gemon, 
hweet wit to willan ond to word-myndum 
umbor-wesendum &r ārna gefremedon.” 
Hwearf pa bi bence, þēr hyre byre w&ron, 


BEOWULF 


1160 


1170 


1180 


The poem was over, 
the poet had performed, a pleasant murmur 
started on the benches, stewards did the rounds 
with wine in splendid jugs, and Wealhtheow came to sit 
in her gold crown between two good men, 
uncle and nephew, each one of whom 
still trusted the other; and the forthright Unferth, 
admired by all for his mind and courage 
although under a cloud for killing his brothers, 
reclined near the king. 

The queen spoke: 

“Enjoy this drink, my most generous lord; 
raise up your goblet, entertain the Geats 
duly and gently, discourse with them, 
be open-handed, happy and fond. 
Relish their company, but recollect as well 
all of the boons that have been bestowed on you. 
The bright court of Heorot has been cleansed 
and now the word is that you want to adopt 
this warrior as a son. So, while you may, 
bask in your fortune, and then bequeath 
kingdom and nation to your kith and kin, 
before your decease. I am certain of Hrothulf. 
He is noble and will use the young ones well. 
He will not let you down. Should you die before him, 
he will treat our children truly and fairly. 
He will honour, I am sure, our two sons, 
repay them in kind when he recollects 
all the good things we gave him once, 
the favour and respect he found in his childhood.” 


She turned then to the bench where her boys sat, 
Hrethric and Hrothmund, with other nobles’ sons, 


BEOWULF 


83 


1190 


1210 


84 


Hréóric ond Hroómund, ond hæleþa bearn, 

giogod etgedere; b&r se góda sæt, 

Béowulf Géata be péam gebroórum twm. 
Him wees ful boren ond fréond-lapu 

wordum bewegned, ond wunden gold 

estum geeawed, earm-réade twa, 

hregl ond hringas, heals-béaga mést 

para pe ic on foldan gefrægen hebbe. 

Nénigne ic under swegle sélran hyrde 

hord-maddum helepa, sypdan Hama etweg 

tö bere byrhtan byrig  Brosinga mene, 

sigle ond sinc-fet; searo-nidas fléah 

Eormenrices; gecéas ecne r&d. 

bone hring hefde — Higelàc Géata, 

nefa Swertinges, nyhstan side, 

siópan he under segne sinc ealgode, 

wel-réaf werede; hyne wyrd fornam, 

sypóan he for wlenco wéan ahsode, 

fæhðe to Frysum. Hé pa fretwe weg, 

eorclan-stanas ofer yda ful, 

rice béoden; hé under rande gecranc. 

Gehwearf pà in Francna fepm — feorh cyninges, 

bréost-gewz#du ond se béah somod; 

wyrsan wig-frecan wel reafeden 

efter güÓ-sceare; Géata leode 

hréa-wic héoldon. Heal swége onfeng. 
Wealhóéo mapelode, heo fore b&m werede sprec: 

"Brüc disses beages, Béowulf léofa, 

hyse, mid h&le, ond pisses hregles néot, 


BEOWULF 


1190 


1210 


all the youth together; and that good man, 
Beowulf the Geat, sat between the brothers. 


The cup was carried to him, kind words 

spoken in welcome and a wealth of wrought gold 
graciously bestowed: two arm bangles, 

a mail-shirt and rings, and the most resplendent 
torque of gold I ever heard tell of 

anywhere on earth or under heaven. 

There was no hoard like it since Hama snatched 
the Brosings’ neck-chain and bore it away 

with its gems and settings to his shining fort, 
away from Eormenric’s wiles and hatred, 

and thereby ensured his eternal reward. 

Hygelac the Geat, grandson of Swerting, 

wore this neck-ring on his last raid; 

at bay under his banner, he defended the booty, 
treasure he had won. Fate swept him away 
because of his proud need to provoke 

a feud with the Frisians. He fell beneath his shield, 
in the same gem-crusted, kingly gear 

he had worn when he crossed the frothing wave-vat. 
So the dead king fell into Frankish hands. 

They took his breast-mail, also his neck-torque, 
and punier warriors plundered the slain 

when the carnage ended; Geat corpses 

covered the field. 


Applause filled the hall. 
Then Wealhtheow pronounced in the presence of the 
company: 
“Take delight in this torque, dear Beowulf, 
wear it for luck and wear also this mail 


BEOWULF 85 


Gifts presented, 
including a torque: 
Beowulf will present 
it in due course to 
King Hygelac, who 
will die wearing it 


1220 


1230 


1240 


86 


béod-gestreona, ond gepeoh tela; 


cen bec mid crefte, ond byssum cnyhtum wes 


làralióe; ic pe pes lean geman. 

Hafast pti gefered, bat 6€ feor ond néah 

ealne wide-ferhb — weras ehtigaó, 

efne swa side swa sē bebiiged 

wind-geard, weallas. Wes, penden pi lifige, 

epeling, eadig! Ic pé an tela 

sinc-gestréona. Béo bi suna minum 

d&dum gedefe, dréam-healdende! 

Hér is &ghwylc eorl Oprum getrywe, 

módes milde, man-drihtne hold; 

begnas syndon gebwére, þēod eal-gearo, 

druncne dryht-guman | doÓ swa ic bidde.” 
Eode pà to setle. b&r wes symbla cyst, 

druncon win weras; wyrd ne cüpon, 

geosceaft grimme, swa hit agangen weard 

eorla manegum, | sypóan fen cwóm, 

ond him Hropgàr gewat tō hofe sinum, 

rice to reste.  Reced weardode 

unrim eorla, swa hie oft ér dydon; 

benc-pelu beredon; hit geondbr&ded wearó 

beddum ond bolstrum. . Beor-scealca sum 

füs ond fége flet-rzste gebéag. 

Setton him tō héafdon — hilde-randas, 

bord-wudu beorhtan. Pér on bence wes 

ofer epelinge yb-geséne 

heapo-steapa helm,  hringed byrne, 

prec-wudu prymlic. Wes peaw hyra, 

pet hie oft wron an wig gearwe, 

ge æt ham ge on herge, | ge gehweper para 

efne swylce m&la, swylce hira man-dryhtne 


BEOWULF 


1220 


1230 


1240 


from our people’s armoury: may you prosper in them! 
Be acclaimed for strength, for kindly guidance 

to these two boys, and your bounty will be sure. 
You have won renown: you are known to all men 
far and near, now and forever. 

Your sway is wide as the wind’s home, 

as the sea around cliffs. And so, my prince, 

I wish you a lifetime’s luck and blessings 

to enjoy this treasure. Treat my sons 

with tender care, be strong and kind. 

Here each comrade is true to the other, 

loyal to lord, loving in spirit. 

The thanes have one purpose, the people are ready: 
having drunk and pledged, the ranks do as I bid.” 


She moved then to her place. Men were drinking wine 
at that rare feast; how could they know fate, 

the grim shape of things to come, 

the threat looming over many thanes 

as night approached and King Hrothgar prepared 

to retire to his quarters? Retainers in great numbers 
were posted on guard as so often in the past. 

Benches were pushed back, bedding gear and bolsters 
spread across the floor, and one man 

lay down to his rest, already marked for death. 

At their heads they placed their polished timber 
battle-shields; and on the bench above them, 

each man’s kit was kept to hand: 

a towering war-helmet, webbed mail-shirt 

and great-shafted spear. It was their habit 

always and everywhere to be ready for action, 

at home or in the camp, in whatever case 


and at whatever time the need arose 


BEOWULF 


Bedtime in Heorot 


87 


1250 


1260 


1270 


1280 


88 


bearf ges&élde; wes seo péod tilu. Yan 
Sigon ba to slépe. Sum sare angeald 
&fen-reste, swa him ful oft gelamp 
sipdan gold-sele Grendel warode, 
unriht efnde, oþþæt ende becwóm, 
swylt efter synnum. Pæt gesyne wearp, 
wid-cüb werum, batte wrecend pa gýt 
lifde æfter labum, lange prage, 
efter giid-ceare. Grendles modor, 
ides, agl&c-wif yrmpe gemunde, 
sé be weter-egesan wunian scolde, 
cealde stréamas, sibdan Cain weard m 
tō ecg-banan  àngan bréper, 
federen-mzge; hē bà fag gewat, 
morpre gemearcod, man-dréam fleon, 
wésten warode. Panon woc fela 
gedsceaft-gasta; wes bra Grendel sum 
heoro-wearh hetelic, sé æt Heorote fand 
weeccendne wer wiges bidan. 
Pér him agléca etgr&épe weard; 
hwzbre hé gemunde megenes strenge, 
gim-fzste gife, de him God sealde, nos 
ond him to An-waldan 4re gelyfde, 
frofre ond fultum; ðyğ hé pone feond ofercwom, 
gehnégde helle-gast. Pa hē héan gewat, 
dreame bed&led déab-wic séon, 
man-cynnes féond. Ond his módor ba gýt 
gifre ond galg-mod  gegan wolde 
sorh-fulne sid, sunu deoó wrecan. 
Com pà to Heorote, der Hring-Dene 
geond pet seld swéfun. ba Ó&r sona weard 


1280 


BEOWULF 


to rally round their lord. They were a right people. 


They went to sleep. And one paid dearly 

for his night’s ease, as had happened to them often, 
ever since Grendel occupied the gold-hall, 
committing evil until the end came, 

death after his crimes. Then it became clear, 
obvious to everyone once the fight was over, 

that an avenger lurked and was still alive, 

grimly biding time. Grendel’s mother, 

monstrous hell-bride, brooded on her wrongs. 

She had been forced down into fearful waters, 

the cold depths, after Cain had killed 

his father’s son, felled his own 

brother with a sword. Branded an outlaw, 

marked by having murdered, he moved into the wilds, 
shunned company and joy. And from Cain there sprang 
misbegotten spirits, among them Grendel, 

the banished and accursed, due to come to grips 
with that watcher in Heorot waiting to do battle. 
The monster wrenched and wrestled with him 

but Beowulf was mindful of his mighty strength, 
the wondrous gifts God had showered on him: 

He relied for help on the Lord of All, 

on His care and favour. So he overcame the foe, 
brought down the hell-brute. Broken and bowed, 
outcast from all sweetness, the enemy of mankind 
made for his death-den. But now his mother 

had sallied forth on a savage journey, 

grief-racked and ravenous, desperate for revenge. 


She came to Heorot. There, inside the hall, 
Danes lay asleep, earls who would soon endure 


BEOWULF 


Another threat is 
lurking in the night 


Grendel’s mother 
attacks 


89 


1290 


1300 


90 


edhwyrft eorlum siþðan inne fealh 
Grendles modor. Wes se gryre l&ssa 
efne swà micle, swa bid megba creft, 
wig-gryre wifes, be wá&pned-men 
bonne heoru bunden, hamere gepuren, 
sweord swate fah swin ofer helme, 
ecgum dyhttig, andweard scireó. 
Da wes on healle  heard-ecg togen, 
sweord ofer setlum, | sid-rand manig 
hafen handa fzst; helm ne gemunde, 
byrnan side, a hine se broga angeat. 
Héo wes on ofste, wolde üt panon, 
féore beorgan, pba heo onfunden wes. 
Hrade heo epelinga anne hefde 
fæste befangen, pa héo to fenne gang. 
Sé wes Hropgare hzlepa léofost 
on gesides had be sém tweonum, 
rice rand-wiga, pone de héo on reste abréat, 
bl&éd-festne beorn. Nes Béowulf dér, 
ac wes Operin &r geteohhod 
efter mápóum-gife mérum Géate. 
Hréan wearó in Heorote; héo under heolfre genam 
cüpe folme; cearu wes geniwod, 
geworden in wicun. Ne wes bet gewrixle til, 
pet hie on ba healfa  bicgan scoldon 
fréonda féorum. Pa wes frod cyning, 
har hilde-rinc, on hréon móde, 
syópan hé aldor-begn  unlyfigendne, 
bone deorestan déadne wisse. 


BEOWULF 


1290 


1300 


a great reversal, once Grendel’s mother 

attacked and entered. Her onslaught was less 

only by as much as an amazon warrior’s 

strength is less than an armed man’s 

when the hefted sword, its hammered edge 

and gleaming blade slathered in blood, 

razes the sturdy boar-ridge off a helmet. 

Then in the hall, hard-honed swords 

were grabbed from the bench, many a broad shield 
lifted and braced; there was little thought of helmets 


or woven mail when they woke in terror. 


The hell-dam was in panic, desperate to get out, 
in mortal terror the moment she was found. 
She had pounced and taken one of the retainers 
in a tight hold, then headed for the fen. 
To Hrothgar, this man was the most beloved 
of the friends he trusted between the two seas. 
She had done away with a great warrior, 
ambushed him at rest. 
Beowulf was elsewhere. 
Earlier, after the award of the treasure, 
the Geat had been given another lodging. 
There was uproar in Heorot. She had snatched their 
trophy, 
Grendel's bloodied hand. It was a fresh blow 
to the afflicted bawn. The bargain was hard, 
both parties having to pay 
with the lives of friends. And the old lord, 
the grey-haired warrior, was heartsore and weary 
when he heard the news: his highest-placed adviser, 
his dearest companion, was dead and gone. 


BEOWULF 


91 


1310 


1320 


1330 


1340 


92 


Hrabe wes to büre Beowulf fetod, 
sigor-éadig secg. Samod &r-dzege 
eode eorla sum, æþele cempa, 
self mid gesióum,  b&r se snotera bad, 
hwzbre him Al-walda @fre wille 
efter wea-spelle wyrpe gefremman. 
Gang 64 efter flore  fyrd-wyróe man 
mid his hand-scale —heal-wudu dynede— 
pet he pone wisan wordum né&gde, 
fréan Ingwina; fregn gif him wére, 
efter néod-lade, niht get&se. 

Hroógaàr mapelode, helm Scyldinga: 
“Ne frin bt efter sélum; | sorh is geniwod 
Denigea léodum. Dead is Aéschere, 
Yrmenlafes  yldra bropor, 
minrün-wita ond min réd-bora, 
eaxl-gestealla, óÓonne wē on orlege 
hafelan weredon, ponne hniton fepan, 
eoferas cnysedan. Swylc scolde eorl wesan, 
æðeling &r-god,  swylc ZEschere wes! 
Wearó him on Heorote to hand-banan 
wel-gést wá&fre; ic ne wat hweder 
atol se wlanc eft-sīðas téah, 
fylle gefrégnod. Heo bà fæhðe wræc, 
pé pt gystran niht Grendel cwealdest 
purh héstne had heardum clammum, 
forpan hé tō lange léode mine 
wanode ond wyrde. HE æt wige gecrang 
ealdres scyldig; ond nü oper cwom 
mihtig man-scada, wolde hyre m#g wrecan, 
ge feor hafaó  f&hóe gestzled, 
pes þe bincean meg  begne monegum, 


BEOWULF 


1310 


1320 


1330 


1340 


Beowulf was quickly brought to the chamber: 
the winner of fights, the arch-warrior, 

came first-footing in with his fellow troops 

to where the king in his wisdom waited, 

still wondering whether Almighty God 

would ever turn the tide of his misfortunes. 

So Beowulf entered with his band in attendance 
and the wooden floor-boards banged and rang 
as he advanced, hurrying to address 

the prince of the Ingwins, asking if he’d rested 
since the urgent summons had come as a surprise. 


Then Hrothgar, the Shieldings’ helmet, spoke: 
“Rest? What is rest? Sorrow has returned. 

Alas for the Danes! Aeschere is dead. 

He was Yrmenlaf’s elder brother 

and a soul-mate to me, a true mentor, 

my right-hand man when the ranks clashed 
and our boar-crests had to take a battering 

in the line of action. Aeschere was everything 
the world admires in a wise man and a friend. 
Then this roaming killer came in a fury 

and slaughtered him in Heorot. Where she is hiding, 
glutting on the corpse and glorying in her escape, 
I cannot tell; she has taken up the feud 
because of last night, when you killed Grendel, 
wrestled and racked him in ruinous combat 
since for too long he had terrorized us 

with his depredations. He died in battle, 

paid with his life; and now this powerful 

other one arrives, this force for evil 

driven to avenge her kinsman’s death. 

Or so it seems to thanes in their grief, 


BEOWULF 


Beowulf is 
summoned 


Hrothgar laments 
the death of his 
counsellor, He 
knows Grendel's 
mother must avenge 
her son 


93 


1350 


1360 


1370 


94 


sē be efter sinc-gyfan on sefan gréotep, 
hreper-bealo hearde; nū seo hand liged, 
sé be Gow wel-hwylcra wilna dohte. 

“Ic baet lond-büend, léode mine, 
sele-rédende secgan hyrde, 
pet hie gesiwon swylce twegen 
micle mearc-stapan moras healdan, 
ellor-g&stas; dra Oder wes, 
pes pe hie gewislicost gewitan meahton, 
idese onlicnes; ōðer earm-sceapen 
on weres westmum | wr&c-lastas tred, 
nafne hé wes māra bonne nig man óóer; 
bone on gear-dagum ‘Grendel’ nemdon 
fold-büende; nó hie feeder cunnon, 
hwæpþer him nig was &r acenned 
dyrnra gasta. Hie dygel lond 
warigead, wulf-hleopu, windige nessas, 
frécne fen-gelàd, ðær fyrgen-stream 
under nessa genipu niber gewited, 
flod under foldan. Nis pet feor heonon 
mil-gemearces, bet se mere standed 
ofer b&m hongiad hrinde bearwas; 
wudu wyrtum fest weter oferhelmaó. 
ber meg nihta gehw&m _ nió-wundor séon, 
fyr on flóde; no pes frod leofad 
gumena bearna pat pone grund wite. 
Deah be h&ó-stapa hundum geswenced, 
heorot hornum trum — holt-wudu séce, 
feorran geflymed,  &r hé feorh seled, 
aldor on fre, Ær hē in wille, 
hafelan hydan. Nis pet hēoru stow; 


BEOWULF 


1350 


1360 


1370 


in the anguish every thane endures 
at the loss of a ring-giver, now that the hand 
that bestowed so richly has been stilled in death. 


"I have heard it said by my people in hall, 
counsellors who live in the upland country, 
that they have seen two such creatures 
prowling the moors, huge marauders 
from some other world. One of these things, 
as far as anyone ever can discern, 
looks like a woman; the other, warped 
in the shape of a man, moves beyond the pale 
bigger than any man, an unnatural birth 
called Grendel by country people 
in former days. They are fatherless creatures, 
and their whole ancestry is hidden in a past 
of demons and ghosts. They dwell apart 
among wolves on the hills, on windswept crags 
and treacherous keshes, where cold streams 
pour down the mountain and disappear 
under mist and moorland. 

A few miles from here 
a frost-stiffened wood waits and keeps watch 
above a mere; the overhanging bank 
is a maze of tree-roots mirrored in its surface. 
At night there, something uncanny happens: 
the water burns. And the mere bottom 
has never been sounded by the sons of men. 
On its bank, the heather-stepper halts: 
the hart in flight from pursuing hounds 
will turn to face them with firm-set horns 
and die in the wood rather than dive 
beneath its surface. That is no good place. 


BEOWULF 


The country people's 
tales about the 
monsters 


The haunted mere 


95 


1380 


1390 


1400 


96 


ponon yó-geblond up astigeó 

won tō wolenum, ponne wind styrep 

lað gewidru, oópet lyft órysmap, 

roderas réotad. Nii is se r&d gelang 

eft et pé Anum.  Eard git ne const, 

frécne stowe, ðær pti findan miht 

fela-sinnigne secg; sec gif pu dyrre. 

Ic be pa fehde feo léanige, 

eald-gestreonum, | swà ic &r dyde, 

wundini golde, gyf py on weg cymest." 
Beowulf mapelode, bearn Ecgbéowes: 


“Ne sorga, snotor guma!  Selre bid $ghwaám 
pet hē his freond wrece, bonne hē fela murne. 


Ure &ghwylc sceal ende gebidan 

worolde lifes; wyrce sé be mote 

domes ær deape; pat bid driht-guman 

unlifgendum efter sélest. 

Aris, rices weard, uton hrape feran, 

Grendles magan gang sceawigan! 

Ic hit pe gehate: no hé on helm losap, 

nē on foldan fepm, nē on fyrgen-holt, 

né on gyfenes grund, ga þēr hé wille. 

Dys dogorpu gebyld hafa 

wéana gehwylces, swā ic be wéne to." 
Ahléop 4a se gomela, Gode pancode, 

mihtigan Drihtne, þæs se man gesprec. 

ba wes Hroógare hors geb&ted, 

wicg wunden-feax; wisa fengel 

geatolic gende; gum-fēþa stop 

lind-hebbendra. Lastas wron 

efter wald-swapum wide gesyne, 


BEOWULF 


1380 


1390 


1400 


When wind blows up and stormy weather 

makes clouds scud and the skies weep, 

out of its depths a dirty surge 

is pitched towards the heavens. Now help depends 
again on you and on you alone. 

The gap of danger where the demon waits 

is still unknown to you. Seek it if you dare. 

I will compensate you for settling the feud 

as I did the last time with lavish wealth, 

coffers of coiled gold, if you come back.” 


Beowulf, son of Ecgtheow, spoke: 

“Wise sir, do not grieve. It is always better 

to avenge dear ones than to indulge in mourning. 
For every one of us, living in this world 

means waiting for our end. Let whoever can 

win glory before death. When a warrior is gone, 
that will be his best and only bulwark. 

So arise, my lord, and let us immediately 

set forth on the trail of this troll-dam. 

I guarantee you: she will not get away, 

not to dens under ground nor upland groves 

nor the ocean floor. She'll have nowhere to flee to. 
Endure your troubles to-day. Bear up 

and be the man I expect you to be." 


With that the old lord sprang to his feet 

and praised God for Beowulf's pledge. 

Then a bit and halter were brought for his horse 
with the plaited mane. The wise king mounted 
the royal saddle and rode out in style 

with a force of shield-bearers. The forest paths 
were marked all over with the monster's tracks, 


BEOWULF 


Beowulf bolsters 
Hrothgar's courage. 
He proclaims the 
heroic code that 
guides their lives 


The expedition to 
the mere 


97 


1410 


1420 


1430 


98 


gang ofer grundas, gegnum for 

ofer myrcan mor, mago-begna ber 

pone selestan | sawol-léasne, 

para be mid Hroógare ham eahtode. 

Ofereode bà zpelinga bearn 

steap stan-hlido, stige nearwe, 

enge 4n-padas, uncüó gelad, 

neowle nessas, nicor-hiisa fela. 

He fearasum  beforan gengde 

wisra monna, wong scéawian; 

oppet he féringa fyrgen-béamas 

ofer harne stan hleonian funde, 

wyn-leasne wudu; weter under stōd 

dréorig on gedrefed. Denum eallum wes, 

winum Scyldinga, weorce on mode 

tō gepolianne, óegne monegum, 

oncyó eorla gehw&ém, | syópan ZEscheres 

on pam holm-clife  hafelan métton. 
Flod blöde weol —folc tō segon— 

hatan heolfre. Horn stundum song 

fuslic fyrd-léoó. Fēþa eal gesæt; 

gesawon 64 efter wetere wyrm-cynnes fela, 

sellice s&-dracan sund cunnian, 

swylce on nes-hleodum _ nicras licgean, 

6a on undern-m&l oft bewitigad 

sorh-fulne sid on segl-rade, 

wyrmas ond wil-déor. Hie on weg hruron 

bitere ond gebolgne; bearhtm ongéaton, 

gūð-horn galan. Sumne Géata léod 

offlan-bogan  féores getwéfde, 

yÓ-gewinnes, pat him on aldre stód 

here-str#l hearda; hē on holme wes 


BEOWULF 


1410 


1420 


1430 


her trail on the ground wherever she had gone 
across the dark moors, dragging away 

the body of that thane, Hrothgar’s best 
counsellor and overseer of the country. 

So the noble prince proceeded undismayed 

up fells and screes, along narrow footpaths 
and ways where they were forced into single file, 
ledges on cliffs above lairs of water-monsters. 
He went in front with a few men, 

good judges of the lie of the land, 

and suddenly discovered the dismal wood, 
mountain trees growing out at an angle 

above grey stones: the bloodshot water 

surged underneath. It was a sore blow 

to all of the Danes, friends of the Shieldings, 

a hurt to each and every one 

of that noble company when they came upon 
Aeschere’s head at the foot of the cliff. 


Everybody gazed as the hot gore 

kept wallowing up and an urgent war-horn 
repeated its notes: the whole party 

sat down to watch. The water was infested 

with all kinds of reptiles. There were writhing sea-dragons 
and monsters slouching on slopes by the cliff, 
serpents and wild things such as those that often 
surface at dawn to roam the sail-road 

and doom the voyage. Down they plunged, 

lashing in anger at the loud call 

of the battle-bugle. An arrow from the bow 

of the Geat chief got one of them 

as he surged to the surface: the seasoned shaft 

stuck deep in his flank and his freedom in the water 


BEOWULF 


99 


1450 


1460 


100 


sundes be sénra, 6é hyne swylt fornam. 
Hrazpe wearó on yóum mid eofer-spréotum 
heoro-hocyhtum hearde genearwod, 

nióa geneged ond on nes togen 

wundorlic wég-bora; weras sceawedon 
gryrelicne gist. 

Gyrede hine Beowulf 
eorl-gewáidum,  nalles for ealdre mearn; 
scolde here-byrne hondum gebroden, 
sid ond searo-fah, sund cunnian, 
séo de bàn-cofan  beorgan cüpe, 
pet him hilde-grap  hrepre ne mihte, 
eorres inwit-feng aldre gescepdan; 
ac se hwita helm  hafelan werede, 
se be mere-grundas mengan scolde, 
sécan sund-gebland since geweordad, 
befongen fréa-wrasnum, swā hine fyrn-dagum 
worhte wépna smið, wundrum téode, 
besette swin-licum, | beet hine syópan no 
brond né beado-mécas  bitan ne meahton. 
Nes pet bonne métost megen-fultuma, 
pet him on Gearfe lah öyle Hroógares; 
wes bem heft-méce Hrunting nama; 
pet wes ān foran eald-gestréona; 
ecg wesiren, 4ter-tanum fah, 
ahyrded heabo-swate; néfre hit æt hilde ne swac 
manna ngum, para be hit mid mundum bewand, 
sé ğe gryre-sidas gegan dorste, 
folc-stede fara. Nes bat forma sīð 
pet hitellen-weorc efnan scolde. 

Hüru ne gemunde mago Ecglafes 
eafopes creftig, pet he &r gesprec 


BEOWULF 


1450 


1460 


got less and less. It was his last swim. 
He was swiftly overwhelmed in the shallows, 
prodded by barbed boar-spears, 
cornered, beaten, pulled up on the bank, 
a strange lake-birth, a loathsome catch 
men gazed at in awe. 

Beowulf got ready, 
donned his war-gear, indifferent to death; 
his mighty, hand-forged, fine-webbed mail 
would soon meet with the menace underwater. 
It would keep the bone-cage of his body safe: 
no enemy’s clasp could crush him in it, 
no vicious armlock choke his life out. 
To guard his head he had a glittering helmet 
that was due to be muddied on the mere bottom 
and blurred in the upswirl. It was of beaten gold, 
princely headgear hooped and hasped 
by a weapon-smith who had worked wonders 
in days gone by and adorned it with boar-shapes; 
since then it had resisted every sword. 
And another item lent by Unferth 


at that moment of need was of no small importance: 


the brehon handed him a hilted weapon, 

a rare and ancient sword named Hrunting. 

The iron blade with its ill-boding patterns 

had been tempered in blood. It had never failed 
the hand of anyone who hefted it in battle, 
anyone who had fought and faced the worst 

in the gap of danger. This was not the first time 
it had been called to perform heroic feats. 


When he lent that blade to the better swordsman, 
Unferth, the strong-built son of Ecglaf, 


BEOWULF 


Beowulf arms for the 
underwater fight 


101 


1470 


1480 


1490 


102 


wine druncen, pa hē pes wépnes onlah 

sélran sweord-frecan; selfa ne dorste 

under yÓa gewin aldre genéban, 

drihtscype dréogan; pàr hē dome forléas, 

ellen-maróum. Ne wes þēm öðrum swa, 

syOpan hē hine to giide gegyred hefde. 
Béowulf mapelode, bearn Ecgbéowes: 

“Gebenc nū, se mæra maga Healfdenes, 

snottra fengel, nū ic eom sides fis, 

gold-wine gumena, hwet wit geó spr&con, 

gif ic et pearfe pinre scolde 

aldre linnan, pat di me à w&re 

ford-gewitenum on feder stéle. 

Wes pi mund-bora minum mago-pegnum, 

hond-gesellum, gif mec hild nime; 

swylce pi 64 madmas, þe pü mé sealdest, 

Hroógàrléofa, Higelace onsend. 

Meg bonne on p&m golde ongitan Géata dryhten, 

geséon sunu Hrédles, ponne hé on pet sinc staraó, 

pet ic gum-cystum  gódne funde 

béaga bryttan, bréac bonne moste. 

Ond pü Unferd lét  ealde lafe, 

wrétlic wég-sweord, wīd-cūðne man 

heard-ecg habban; ic mé mid Hruntinge 

dom gewyrce, opde mec déad nimeó." 
ZEfter bem wordum Weder-Géata léod 

efste mid elne, nalas andsware 

bidan wolde, brim-wylm onfeng 

hilde-rince. Da wes hwil deges, 

&r he bone grund-wong ongytan mehte. 


BEOWULF 


1470 


1480 


1490 


could hardly have remembered the ranting speech 
he had made in his cups. He was not man enough 
to face the turmoil of a fight under water 

and the risk to his life. So there he lost 

fame and repute. It was different for the other 
rigged out in his gear, ready to do battle. 


Beowulf, son of Ecgtheow, spoke: 

“Wisest of kings, now that I have come 

to the point of action, I ask you to recall 

what we said earlier: that you, son of Halfdane 
and gold-friend to retainers, that you, if I should fall 
and suffer death while serving your cause, 
would act like a father to me afterwards. 

If this combat kills me, take care 

of my young company, my comrades in arms. 
And be sure also, my beloved Hrothgar, 

to send Hygelac the treasures I received. 

Let the lord of the Geats gaze on that gold, 

let Hrethel’s son take note of it and see 

that I found a ring-giver of rare magnificence 
and enjoyed the good of his generosity. 

And Unferth is to have what I inherited: 

to that far-famed man I bequeath my own 
sharp-honed, wave-sheened wonderblade. 
With Hrunting I shall gain glory or die.” 


After these words, the prince of the Weather-Geats 
was impatient to be away and plunged suddenly: 
without more ado, he dived into the heaving 
depths of the lake. It was the best part of a day 
before he could see the solid bottom. 


BEOWULF 


Beowulf takes his 
leave 


103 


1500 


1510 


1520 


104 


Sona pet onfunde, sé de floda begong 
heoro-gifre behéold hund misséra, 
grim ond gr&édig, bet b&r gumena sum 
zl-wihta eard ufan cunnode. 

Grap pa togéanes; güÓ-rinc gefeng 

atolan clommum; nō py &r in gescod 
halanlice; hring titan ymb-bearh, 

pet héo bone fyrd-hom durhf6n ne mihte, 
locene leodo-syrcan Japan fingrum. 

Ber pà séo brim-wylf, pba heo to botme com, 
hringa bengel tō hofe sinum, 

swa he ne mihte, no hé pes modig wes, 
wá&pna gewealdan; ac hine wundra pes fela 
swencte on sunde, sá&-deor monig 
hilde-tüxum — here-syrcan brec, 

éhton aglécan. Da se eorl ongeat, 

pet hé in niÓ-sele  nat-hwylcum wes, 

pér him n&nig water wihte ne scepede, 

né him for hrof-sele hrinan ne mehte 
f&r-gripe flodes: fyr-léoht geseah, 

blacne léoman — beorhte scinan. 

Ongeat þā se goda  grund-wyrgenne, 
mere-wif mihtig; megen-rés forgeaf 
hilde-bille, hond sweng ne oftéah, 
pet hire on hafelan hring-mél agol 
grédig gid-léod. Da se gist onfand, 
pet se beado-léoma  bitan nolde, 
aldre scepóan, ac seo ecg geswac 
Ó&odne zt pearfe; dolode &r fela 
hond-gemota, helm oft gescer, 
féges fyrd-hregl; 6a wes forma sid 
déorum madme, bet his dom aleg. 


BEOWULF 


1500 


1510 


1520 


Quickly the one who haunted those waters, 
who had scavenged and gone her gluttonous rounds 


Beowulf is captured 
by Grendel’s mother 
for a hundred seasons, sensed a human 

observing her outlandish lair from above. 

So she lunged and clutched and managed to catch him 
in her brutal grip; but his body, for all that, 

remained unscathed: the mesh of the chain-mail 

saved him on the outside. Her savage talons 

failed to rip the web of his warshirt. 

Then once she touched bottom, that wolfish swimmer 
carried the ring-mailed prince to her court 

so that for all his courage he could never use 

the weapons he carried; and a bewildering horde 

came at him from the depths, droves of sea-beasts 
who attacked with tusks and tore at his chain-mail 

in a ghastly onslaught. The gallant man 

could see he had entered some hellish turn-hole 

and yet the water did not work against him 

because the hall-roofing held off 

the force of the current; then he saw firelight, 

a gleam and flare-up, a glimmer of brightness. 


The hero observed that swamp-thing from hell, 
the tarn-hag in all her terrible strength, 

then heaved his war-sword and swung his arm: 
the decorated blade came down ringing 

and singing on her head. But he soon found 

his battle-torch extinguished: the shining blade 
refused to bite. It spared her and failed 

the man in his need. It had gone through many 
hand-to-hand fights, had hewed the armour 
and helmets of the doomed, but here at last 


His sword fails to do 
damage 


the fabulous powers of that heirloom failed. 


BEOWULF 105 


1530 


1540 


1550 


1560 


106 


Eft was an-réd, nalas elnes læt, 
mérda gemyndig mé&g Hylaces. i236 
Wearp 64 wunden-m&l wré&ttum gebunden 
yrre Gretta, bat hit on eoróan leg, 
stid ond styl-ecg; strenge getruwode, 
mund-gripe megenes. Swa sceal man don, 
bonne he æt güóe  gegan benceó 
longsumne lof; nā ymb his lif cearaó. 
Gefeng bà be eaxle —nalas for fæhðe mearn— 
Güó-Geata léod  Grendles modor; 
bregd bà beadwe heard, pa hē gebolgen wes, 
feorh-genidlan, bat heo on flet gebéah. 1540 
Héo him eft hrabe andléan forgeald 
grimman grapum, ond him togeanes feng. 
Oferwearp bà werig-mod wigena strengest, 
febe-cempa, pat he on fylle wearó. 
Ofszt pa bone sele-gyst ond hyre seax getéah, 
brad, brün-ecg; wolde hire bearn wrecan, 
angan eaferan. Him on eaxle leg 
bréost-net broden; pt gebearh fēore, 
wid ord ond wid ecge ingang forstdd. 
Hefde 64 forsióod | sunu Ecgpeowes 1550 
under gynne grund, Géata cempa, 
nemne him heado-byrne helpe gefremede, 
here-net hearde, ond halig God 
gewéold wig-sigor, witig Drihten, 
rodera R&dend, hit on ryht gescéd 
yóelice, sypóan hē eft àstod. 

Geseah 64 on searwum — sige-eadig bil, 
eald-sweord eotenisc  ecgum pyhtig, 
wigena weord-mynd; pet wes wépna cyst, 
büton hit wes mare  Óonne &nig mon oder 


1560 


BEOWULF 


Hygelac’s kinsman kept thinking about 

his name and fame: he never lost heart. 

Then, in a fury, he flung his sword away. 

The keen, inlaid, worm-loop-patterned steel 

was hurled to the ground: he would have to rely 
on the might of his arm. So must a man do 

who intends to gain enduring glory 

in a combat. Life doesn’t cost him a thought. 
Then the prince of War-Geats, warming to this fight 
with Grendel’s mother, gripped her shoulder 

and laid about him in a battle frenzy: 

he pitched his killer opponent to the floor 

but she rose quickly and retaliated, 

grappled him tightly in her grim embrace. 

The sure-footed fighter felt daunted, 

the strongest of warriors stumbled and fell. 

So she pounced upon him and pulled out 

a broad, whetted knife: now she would avenge 
her only child. But the mesh of chain-mail 

on Beowulf's shoulder shielded his life, 

turned the edge and tip of the blade. 

The son of Ecgtheow would have surely perished 
and the Geats lost their warrior under the wide earth 
had the strong links and locks of his war-gear 
not helped to save him: holy God 

decided the victory. It was easy for the Lord, 

the Ruler of Heaven, to redress the balance 

once Beowulf got back up on his feet. 


Then he saw a blade that boded well, 

a sword in her armoury, an ancient heirloom 
from the days of the giants, an ideal weapon, 
one that any warrior would envy, 


BEOWULF 


He fights back with 
his bare hands 


Beowulf discovers a 
mighty sword and 
slays his opponent 


107 


1570 


1580 


1590 


108 


tō beadu-lace  atberan meahte, 

god ond geatolic, giganta geweorc. 

Hē geféng pa fetel-hilt, freca Scyldinga, 

hréoh ond heoro-grim, hring-m&l gebrægd 

aldres orwéna,  yrringa sloh, 

bat hire wid halse heard grapode, 

ban-hringas brec; bil eal óurhwod 

fégne fl#sc-homan; hēo on flet gecrong, 

sweord wes swatig, secg weorce gefeh. 
Lixte se léoma, lēoht inne stōd, 

efne swa of hefene  hadre scined 

rodores candel. He efter recede wlat; 

hwearf ba be wealle, wpen hafenade 

heard be hiltum — Higelàces degn, 

yrre ond an-réd. Næs seo ecg fracod 

hilde-rince, ac he hrape wolde 

Grendle forgyldan giid-résa fela, 

Oara be he geworhte tō West-Denum 

oftor micle donne on &nne sid 

bonne he Hrodgares heord-genéatas 

sloh on sweofote, sl&pende fr&t 

folces Denigea  fyf-tyne men, 

ond oder swylc üt offerede, 

laóliculac. He him pzs lean forgeald, 

rébe cempa, to des be he on reste geseah 

gud-wérigne Grendel licgan, 

aldor-léasne, swa him &r gescod 

hild æt Heorote. Hra wide sprong, 

sypdan he efter deaóe drepe browade, 

heoro-sweng heardne, ond hine pa héafde becearf. 
Sõna pat gesawon  snottre ceorlas, 


BEOWULF 


1570 


1580 


1590 


but so huge and heavy of itself 

only Beowulf could wield it in a battle. 

So the Shieldings’ hero, hard-pressed and enraged, 
took a firm hold of the hilt and swung 

the blade in an arc, a resolute blow 

that bit deep into her neck-bone 

and severed it entirely, toppling the doomed 

house of her flesh; she fell to the floor. 

The sword dripped blood, the swordsman was elated. 


A light appeared and the place brightened 
the way the sky does when heaven’s candle 
is shining clearly. He inspected the vault: 
with sword held high, its hilt raised 

to guard and threaten, Hygelac’s thane 
scouted by the wall in Grendel’s wake. 

Now the weapon was to prove its worth. 

The warrior determined to take revenge 

for every gross act Grendel had committed— 
and not only for that one occasion 

when he’d come to slaughter the sleeping troops, 
fifteen of Hrothgar’s house-guards 

surprised on their benches and ruthlessly devoured, 
and as many again carried away, 

a brutal plunder. Beowulf in his fury 

now settled that score: he saw the monster 
in his resting place, war-weary and wrecked, 
a lifeless corpse, a casualty 

of the battle in Heorot. The body gaped 

at the stroke dealt to it after death: 

Beowulf cut the corpse’s head off. 


Immediately the counsellors keeping a lookout 


BEOWULF 


He proceeds to 
behead Grendel's 
corpse 


109 


1610 


1620 


110 


bà ðe mid Hroégare on holm wliton, 
pet wes yó-geblond eal gemenged, 
brim blode fah. Blonden-feaxe 
gomele ymb godne  ongeador sprécon 
pet hig pes edelinges eft ne wendon, 
pet hē sige-hrédig sécean come 
márne beoden; pa das monige geweard 
pet hine séo brim-wylf abroten hefde. 
Nes ofgéafon 
gewat him ham bonon 1600 


Da com non deges. 
hwate Scyldingas; 
gold-wine gumena; 
módes séoce, ond on mere staredon; 

wiston ond ne wéndon, pet hie heora wine-drihten 
selfne gesawon. 


gistas sétan 


ba pet sweord ongan 
efter heapo-swate — hilde-gicelum, 
wig-bil wanian. Pet wes wundra sum, 
pet hit eal gemealt ise gelicost, 
Sonne forstes bend Feder onl&teó, 
onwindeÓ wél-rapas, se geweald hafaó 
sila ond m&la; pet is sod Metod. 1610 
Ne nom hé in b&m wicum, Weder-Géata léod, 
maàóm-&hta mà, beh he b&r monige geseah, 
büton bone hafelan ond pa hilt somod, 
since fage; sweord &r gemealt, 
forbarn broden-m&l; wees beet blod to bes hat, 
sé b&r inne swealt. 
sé be &r æt secce gebad 


zttren ellor-gá&st, 
Sōna wes on sunde, 
wig-hryre wraóra, weter up burhdeaf; 
weron yd-gebland eal gefelsod, 
eacne eardas, þā se ellor-gast 


1620 


BEOWULF 


with Hrothgar, watching the lake water, 
saw a heave-up and surge of waves onhe shere 
and blood in the backwash. They bowed grey heads, 
spoke in their sage, experienced way 

about the good warrior, how they never again 
expected to see that prince returning 

in triumph to their king. It was clear to many 


that the wolf of the deep had destroyed him forever. 


The ninth hour of the day arrived. 
The brave Shieldings abandoned the cliff-top 
and the king went home; but sick at heart, 
staring at the mere, the strangers held on. 
They wished, without hope, to behold their lord, 
Beowulf himself. 

Meanwhile, the sword 
began to wilt into gory icicles, malis 
to slather and thaw. It was a wonderful thing, 
the way it all melted as ice melts 
when the Father eases the fetters off the frost 
and unravels the water-ropes. He who wields power 
over time and tide: He is the true Lord. 


The Geat captain saw treasure in abundance 

but carried no spoils from those quarters 

except for the head and the inlaid hilt 

embossed with jewels; its blade had melted 

and the scrollwork on it burnt, so scalding was the blood 
of the poisonous fiend who had perished there. 

Then away he swam, the one who had survived 

the fall of his enemies, flailing to the surface. 

The wide water, the waves and pools 

were no longer infested once the wandering fiend 


BEOWULF 111 


Forebodings of those 


The sword blade 


Beowulf returns 
with the sword's hilt 
and Grendel’s head 


1630 


1640 


1650 


112 


oflet lif-dagas ond pas l&nan gesceaft. 
Cóm pa to lande  lid-manna helm 
swid-m6d swymman,  s&-làce gefeah, 


megen-byrpenne  pàra be he him mid hefde. 


Eodon him pa tog&anes, Gode pancodon, 

óryólic þegna heap,  peodnes gefégon, 

bas pe hi hyne gesundne  geseon moston. 

Da wes of bém hroran helm ond byrne 

lungre alysed. Lagu drüusade, 

weter under wolcnum, wel-dréore fag. 

Férdon ford bonon fébe-lastum, 

ferhbum fegne, fold-weg mëton, 

ciibe str&te; cyning-balde men 

from p&m holm-clife hafelan b&ron 

earfodlice heora &ghwaprum 

fela-modigra. Feower scoldon 

on bàm wel-stenge weorcum geferian 

to p&m gold-sele Grendles heafod, 

opózt semninga to sele comon 

frome, fyrd-hwate  feower-tyne 

Geata gongan; gum-dryhten mid 

modig on gemonge | meodo-wongas tred. 

Da com in gan ealdor degna, 

d&d-céne mon  dóme gewurpad, 

hele hilde-deor, Hroógar grétan. 

bà was befeaxe on flet boren 

Grendles héafod, þēr guman druncon, 

egeslic for eorlum ond p&re idese mid; 

wlite-seon wrétlic weras on sáwon. 
Beowulf mabelode, bearn Ecgbéowes: 


BEOWULF 


1630 


1640 


1650 


let go of her life and this unreliable world. 

The seafarers’ leader made for land, 

resolutely swimming, delighted with his prize, 
the mighty load he was lugging to the surface. 
His thanes advanced in a troop to meet him, 
thanking God and taking great delight 

in seeing their prince back safe and sound. 
Quickly the hero’s helmet and mail-shirt 

were loosed and unlaced. The lake settled, 
clouds darkened above the bloodshot depths. 


With high hearts they headed away 

along footpaths and trails through the fields, 
roads that they knew, each of them wrestling 
with the head they were carrying from the lakeside cliff, 
men kingly in their courage and capable 

of difficult work. It was a task for four 

to hoist Grendel’s head on a spear 

and bear it under strain to the bright hall. 
But soon enough they neared the place, 
fourteen Geats in fine fettle, 

striding across the outlying ground 

in a delighted throng around their leader. 


In he came then, the thane’s commander, 

the arch-warrior, to address Hrothgar: 

his courage was proven, his glory was secure. 

Grendel’s head was hauled by the hair, 

dragged across the floor where the people were drinking, 
a horror for both queen and company to behold. 

They stared in awe. It was an astonishing sight. 


Beowulf, son of Ecgtheow, spoke: 


BEOWULF 


He displays 
Grendel’s head 
in Heorot 


113 


1660 


1670 


1680 


114 


“Hwet, we be pas s&-lac, sunu Healfdenes, 
leod Scyldinga, lustum bróhton, 
tires tō tàcne, pe pt her to locast. 
Ic pet unsófte ealdre gedigde, 
wigge under wetere, weorc genépde 
earfodlice; ætrihte wes 
güó getwefed, nymde mec God scylde. 
Ne meahte ic æt hilde mid Hruntinge 
wiht gewyrcan, beah pet w&pen duge; 
ac mé geüde ylda Waldend 
pet ic on wage geseah  wlitig hangian 
eald-sweord eacen —oftost wisode 
winigea leasum— _ pet ic Óy w&pne gebr&d. 
Ofsloh 64 æt b&re seecce, bà me sal ageald, 
hüses hyrdas. ba pet hilde-bil 
forbarn, brogden-m&l, swa bet blod gesprang, 
hatost heabo-swata. Ic pat hilt panan 
feondum etferede, fyren-d&da wrec, 
déaó-cwealm Denigea, swa hit gedéfe wes. 
Ic hit pé ponne gehate, aet bü on Heorote most 
sorh-leas swefan mid pinra secga gedryht, 
ond þegna gehwylc pinra léoda, 
duguóe ond iogobe, pat hū him ondr&dan ne pearft, 
péoden Scyldinga, on pa healfe, 
aldor-bealu eorlum, swa pü &r dydest.” 

Da wes gylden hilt gamelum rince, 
harum hild-fruman on hand gyfen, 
enta £r-geweorc; hit on &ht gehwearf 
efter déofla hryre Denigea fréan, 
wundor-smipa geweorc; ond ba pas worold ofgeaf 
grom-heort guma, Godes andsaca, 
moróres scyldig, ond his modor éac; 


BEOWULF 


1670 


1680 


“So, son of Halfdane, prince of the Shieldings, 

we are glad to bring this booty from the lake. 

It is a token of triumph and we tender it to you. 

I barely survived the battle under water. 

It was hard-fought, a desperate affair 

that could have gone badly; if God had not helped me, 
the outcome would have been quick and fatal. 
Although Hrunting is hard-edged, 

I could never bring it to bear in battle. 

But the Lord of Men allowed me to behold— 

for He often helps the unbefriended— 

an ancient sword shining on the wall, 

a weapon made for giants, there for the wielding. 
Then my moment came in the combat and I struck 
the dwellers in that den. Next thing the damascened 
sword blade melted; it bloated and it burned 

in their rushing blood. I have wrested the hilt 
from the enemies' hand, avenged the evil 

done to the Danes; it is what was due. 

And this I pledge, O prince of the Shieldings: 

you can sleep secure with your company of troops 
in Heorot Hall. Never need you fear 

for a single thane of your sept or nation, 

young warriors or old, that laying waste of life 
that you and your people endured of yore." 


Then the gold hilt was handed over 

to the old lord, a relic from long ago 

for the venerable ruler. That rare smithwork 

was passed on to the prince of the Danes 

when those devils perished; once death removed 
that murdering, guilt-steeped, God-cursed fiend, 
eliminating his unholy life 


BEOWULF 


A brief account 
of the fight 


Beowulf presents the 
sword-hilt to 
Hrothgar 


115 


1690 


1700 


1710 


116 


on geweald gehwearf worold-cyninga 
ó&m sélestan be sem twéonum, 
Oara be on Sceden-igge sceattas dēlde. 
Hroógar madelode, hylt sceawode, 
ealde Jafe. On 6&m wes or writen 
fyrn-gewinnes, sydban flod ofsloh, 
gifen geotende, giganta cyn; 
frécne geferdon; pat wes fremde béod 
écean Dryhtne; him pes ende-léan 
purh weteres wylm Waldend sealde. 
Swa wes on Ó&m scennum  sciran goldes 
purh rün-stafas rihte gemearcod, 
geseted ond geséd, hwam pet sweord geworht, 
Irena cyst, d&rest ware, 
wreoben-hilt ond wyrm-fah. D4 se wisa sprec, 
sunu Healfdenes —swigedon ealle—: 
“Pet lā meg secgan, sé be soó ond riht 
fremed on folce, feor eal gemon, 
eald é6el-weard, pet des eorl wére 
geboren betera! Blēd is ar&red 
geond wid-wegas, wine min Beowulf, 
6in ofer béoda gehwylce. Eal pt hit gepyldum healdest, 
magen mid modes snyttrum. Ic bé sceal mine gel&stan 
fréode, swà wit furóum spr&con. Dii scealt to frofre 
weorpan 
eallang-twidig léodum pinum 
hzleóum to helpe. 
Ne weard Heremoód swa 
eaforum Ecgwelan, Ar-Scyldingum; 
ne geweox hé him tō willan, ac tō wel-fealle 
ond to deaó-cwalum Deniga léodum. 


BEOWULF 


1700 


1710 


and his mother’s as well, it was willed to that king 
who of all the lavish gift-lords of the north 
was the best regarded between the two seas. 


Hrothgar spoke; he examined the hilt, 
that relic of old times. It was engraved all over 
and showed how war first came into the world 
and the flood destroyed the tribe of giants. 
They suffered a terrible severance from the Lord; 
the Almighty made the waters rise, 
drowned them in the deluge for retribution. 
In pure gold inlay on the sword-guards 
there were rune-markings correctly incised, 
stating and recording for whom the sword 
had been first made and ornamented 
with its scrollworked hilt. Then everyone hushed 
as the son of Halfdane spoke this wisdom. 
“A protector of his people, pledged to uphold 
truth and justice and to respect tradition, 
is entitled to affirm that this man 
was born to distinction. Beowulf, my friend, 
your fame has gone far and wide, 
you are known everywhere. In all things you are even- 
tempered, 
prudent and resolute. So I stand firm by the promise of 
friendship 

we exchanged before. Forever you will be 
your people’s mainstay and your own warriors’ 
helping hand. 

Heremod was different, 
the way he behaved to Ecgwala’s sons. 
His rise in the world brought little joy 
to the Danish people, only death and destruction. 


BEOWULF 


Hrothgar's address 
to Beowulf 


He contrasts 
Beowulf with King 
Heremod 


117 


1720 


1730 


1740 


Bréat bolgen-moód béod-genéatas, 
eaxl-gesteallan, oppzt hē ana hwearf, 

mare, péoden, mon-dreamum from, 

óeah þe hine mihtig God mzgenes wynnum, 
eafepum stepte, ofer calle men 

ford gefremede. Hwebere him on ferhpe greow 
bréost-hord bl6d-réow; nallas béagas geaf 
Denum efter dóme. Dréam-léas gebad, 

pet hē bes gewinnes weorc prowade, 
léod-bealo longsum. Di pe l&r be pon, 
gum-cyste ongit! Ic pis gid be pé 

awrec wintrum fród. 


1720 


Wundor is t6 secganne, 
hū mihtig God manna cynne 
purh sidne sefan — snyttru bryttad, 
eard ond eorlscipe; hē ah ealra geweald. 
Hwilum hé on lufan lēteð hworfan 
monnes mód-geponc méran cynnes, 
seleó him on eple eorpan wynne 
to healdanne, hléo-burh wera; 
gedé6 him swà gewealdene worolde délas, 
side rice, þæt hé his selfa ne meg 
for his unsnyttrum ende gepencean. 
Wunaó hé on wiste, no hine wiht dweled 
adl nē yldo, né him inwit-sorh 
on sefan sweorced, né gesacu Ohwér 
ecg-hete Eowed, ac him eal worold 
wendeó on willan. Hē bet wyrse ne con, 
odpet him on innan  ofer-hygda dēl 
weaxed ond wridaó, bonne se weard swefeó, 
sawele hyrde; bid se sl&p to fest, 
bisgum begunden; bona swide néah, 


1730 


1740 


BEOWULF 


He vented his rage on men he caroused with, 
killed his own comrades, a pariah king 
who cut himself off from his own kind, 
even though Almighty God had made him 
eminent and powerful and marked him from the start 
for a happy life. But a change happened, 
he grew bloodthirsty, gave no more rings 
to honour the Danes. He suffered in the end 
for having plagued his people for so long: 
his life lost happiness. 

So learn from this 
and understand true values. I who tell you 
have wintered into wisdom. 

It is a great wonder 
how Almighty God in His magnificence 
favours our race with rank and scope 
and the gift of wisdom; His sway is wide. 
Sometimes He allows the mind of a man 
of distinguished birth to follow its bent, 
grants him fulfilment and felicity on earth 
and forts to command in his own country. 

He permits him to lord it in many lands 

until the man in his unthinkingness 

forgets that it will ever end for him. 

He indulges his desires; illness and old age 
mean nothing to him; his mind is untroubled 
by envy or malice or the thought of enemies 
with their hate-honed swords. The whole world 
conforms to his will, he is kept from the worst 
until an element of overweening 

enters him and takes hold 

while the soul’s guard, its sentry, drowses, 
grown too distracted. A killer stalks him, 


BEOWULF 


Hrothgar's discourse 
on the dangers of 
power 


119 


1750 


1760 


1770 


120 


sé be of flan-bogan  fyrenum scéoted. 

bonne bid on hrepre under helm drepen 

biteran str&le— him bebeorgan ne con— 

wom wundor-bebodum  wergan gàstes. 

Pinced him tō lytel pat hé to lange héold; 

gytsaó grom-hydig, nallas on gylp seled 

f&tte béagas; ond hé pa foró-gesceaft 

forgyteó ond forgymeó, þæs be him &r God sealde, 

wuldres Waldend, weord-mynda dél. 

Hit on ende-stef eft gelimped, 

batselc-homa lēne gedreoseó, 

fége gefealleó; fehó ober to, 

sé be unmurnlice madmas dé&lep 

eorles £r-gestréon, egesan ne gymeó. 

Bebeorh pé done bealo-nid, Beowulf leofa, 

secg betsta, ond be pet selre gecéos, 

éce rédas; ofer-hyda ne gym, 

máre cempa! Nii is pines megnes blad 

ane hwile; eft sona bid 

bat pec adl oððe ecg eafobes getwafeó, 

oððe fyres feng odde flodes wylm 

odde gripe méces odde gares fliht 

oóóe atol yldo, odde Gagena bearhtm 

forsited ond forsworceó; semninga bid, 

pet dec, dryht-guma, déad oferswyded. 
“Swa ic Hring-Dena hund misséra 

wéold under wolcnum, ond hig wigge beléac 

manigum m&gba_  geond pysne middan-geard, 

zscum ond ecgum, pet ic mē &nigne 

under swegles begong  gesacan ne tealde. 

Hwet me bes on ēþle edwenden cwom, 


BEOWULF 


1750 


1760 


an archer who draws a deadly bow. 

And then the man is hit in the heart, 

the arrow flies beneath his defences, 

the devious promptings of the demon start. 

His old possessions seem paltry to him now. 

He covets and resents; dishonours custom 

and bestows no gold; and because of good things 
that the Heavenly Powers gave him in the past 
he ignores the shape of things to come. 

Then finally the end arrives 

when the body he was lent collapses and falls 
prey to its death; ancestral possessions 

and the goods he hoarded are inherited by another 
who lets them go with a liberal hand. 


“O flower of warriors, beware of that trap. 
Choose, dear Beowulf, the better part, 
eternal rewards. Do not give way to pride. 
For a brief while your strength is in bloom 
but it fades quickly; and soon there will follow 
illness or the sword to lay you low, 

or a sudden fire or surge of water 

or jabbing blade or javelin from the air 

or repellent age. Your piercing eye 

will dim and darken; and death will arrive, 
dear warrior, to sweep you away. 


“Just so I ruled the Ring-Danes’ country 

for fifty years, defended them in wartime 

with spear and sword against constant assaults 
by many tribes: I came to believe 

my enemies had faded from the face of the earth. 
Still, what happened was a hard reversal 


BEOWULF 


Beowulf is exhorted 
to be mindful of the 
fragility of life 


No life is immune to 
danger: Hrothgar's 
experience proves it 


121 


1780 


1790 


1800 


122 


gyrn efter gomene, seobdan Grendel wearó, 
eald-gewinna, ingenga min; 

ic bre socne  singales weg 

mod-ceare micle. Pas sig Metode banc, 
écean Dryhtne, pes ðe ic on aldre gebad, 
bat ic on pone hafelan  heoro-dreorigne 

ofer eald gewin éagum starige! 

Ga nū to setle, symbel-wynne dréoh, 
wig-geweorpad; unc sceal worn fela 
mabma gemanra, sipóan morgen bið.” 

Geat wes gled-mod,  géong sona to, 
setles néosan, swa se snottra heht. 
bà wes eft swā r ellen-rofum, 
flet-sittendum  fzegere gereorded 
niowan stefne. Niht-helm geswearc 
deorc ofer dryht-gumum. Dugud eal Aras; 
wolde blonden-feax beddes néosan, 
gamela Scylding. Géat unigmetes wél, 
rofne rand-wigan, restan lyste. 

Sona him sele-begn sides wérgum, 
feorran-cundum forð wisade, 

sé for andrysnum  ealle beweotede 
begnes bearfe, swylce py dogore 
heapo-lidende habban scoldon. 

Reste hine bà rüm-heort; reced hliuade 
géap ond gold-fah; gest inne swæf, 
oppet hrefn blaca heofones wynne 
blid-heort bodode. Da cóm beorht scacan 
scima efter sceadwe. Scapan onetton, 
wiron ebelingas eft to leodum 


BEOWULF 


1790 


1800 


from bliss to grief. Grendel struck 

after lying in wait. He laid waste to the land 

and from that moment my mind was in dread 

of his depredations. So I praise God 

in His heavenly glory that I lived to behold 

this head dripping blood and that after such harrowing 
I can look upon it in triumph at last. 

Take your place, then, with pride and pleasure 

and move to the feast. To-morrow morning 

our treasure will be shared and showered upon you.” 


The Geat was elated and gladly obeyed 

the old man’s bidding; he sat on the bench. 
And soon all was restored, the same as before. 
Happiness came back, the hall was thronged, 
and a banquet set forth; black night fell 

and covered them in darkness. 

Then the company rose 
for the old campaigner: the grey-haired prince 
was ready for bed. And a need for rest 
came over the brave shield-bearing Geat. 

He was a weary seafarer, far from home, 

so immediately a house-guard guided him out, 
one whose office entailed looking after 
whatever a thane on the road in those days 
might need or require. It was noble courtesy. 


That great heart rested. The hall towered, 
gold-shingled and gabled, and the guest slept in it 
until the black raven with raucous glee 
announced heaven’s joy, and a hurry of brightness 
overran the shadows. Warriors rose quickly, 
impatient to be off: their own country 


BEOWULF 


A feast. The warriors 
rest 


123 


1810 


1820 


1830 


124 


füse to farenne; wolde feor banon 

cuma collen-ferhó ceoles neosan. 

Heht pa se hearda  Hrunting beran 

sunu Ecglafes, heht his sweord niman, 

léoflic iren; sægde him pes léanes panc, 

cwæð, hé bone güÓ-wine  gódne tealde, 

wig-creftigne, nales wordum log 

meces ecge: pet wes modig secg. 

Ond pa sid-frome, | searwum gearwe 

wigend wéron; eode weoró Denum 

ebeling tō yppan, b&r se oper wes, 

hele hilde-deor Hroógar grétte. 
Beowulf mapelode, bearn Ecgbéowes: 

“Ni we s&-lidend | secgan wyllaó, 

feorran cumene, bet wé fundiap 

Higelac sécan. W&ron her tela, 

willum bewenede; pti ts wel dohtest. 

Gif ic bonne on eorpan Owihte meg 

pinre mód-lufan  maran tilian, 

gumena dryhten, donne ic gyt dyde, 

gud-geweorca, ic béo gearo sona. 

Gif ic pet gefricge ofer floda begang, 

bat pec ymb-sittend egesan pywad, 

swa bec hetende hwilum dydon, 

ic óé püsenda þegna bringe, 

helepa to helpe. Ic on Higelac wat, 

Geata dryhten, péah de hé geong sy, 

folces hyrde, pat he mec fremman wile 


wordum ond weorcum, pet ic pe wél herige 


ond bé to geoce  gàr-holt bere, 
megenes fultum,  p&r de bid manna pearf. 
Gif him ponne Hrepric to hofum Geata 


BEOWULF 


1810 


1830 


was beckoning the nobles; and the bold voyager 
longed to be aboard his distant boat. 

Then that stalwart fighter ordered Hrunting 

to be brought to Unferth, and bade Unferth 

take the sword and thanked him for lending it. 
He said he had found it a friend in battle 

and a powerful help; he put no blame 


on the blade’s cutting edge. He was a considerate man. 


And there the warriors stood in their war-gear, 
eager to go, while their honoured lord 

approached the platform where the other sat. 

The undaunted hero addressed Hrothgar. 

Beowulf, son of Ecgtheow, spoke: 

“Now we who crossed the wide sea 

have to inform you that we feel a desire 

to return to Hygelac. Here we have been welcomed 
and thoroughly entertained. You have treated us well. 
If there is any favour on earth I can perform 
beyond deeds of arms I have done already, 
anything that would merit your affections more, 

I shall act, my lord, with alacrity. 

If ever I hear from across the ocean 

that people on your borders are threatening battle 
as attackers have done from time to time, 

I shall land with a thousand thanes at my back 

to help your cause. Hygelac may be young 

to rule a nation, but this much I know 

about the king of the Geats: he will come to my aid 
and want to support me by word and action 

in your hour of need, when honour dictates 

that I raise a hedge of spears around you. 

Then if Hrethric should think about travelling 


BEOWULF 


Beowulf and his 
band prepare to 
depart 


125 


1840 


1850 


1860 


126 


gepingeó, péodnes bearn, hé meg pér fela 


fréonda findan; feor-cypóe beoó 

sélran gesoóhte  b&m pe him selfa deah." 
Hroógàr mapelode him on andsware: 
"be bà word-cwydas — wigtig Drihten 
onsefan sende; ne hyrde ic snotorlicor 
on swa geongum feore guman pingian. 


Pū eart megenes strang ond on mode frod, 


wis word-cwida. Wen ic talige, 

gif bat geganged, pet de gar nymeó, 
hild heoru-grimme Hréples eaferan, 

adl opde iren. ealdor dinne, 

folces hyrde, ond pü pin feorh hafast, 
pet bpé S&-Géatas sélran nebben 

tō gecéosenne cyning &nigne, 
hord-weard helepa, gyf pt healdan wylt 
maga rice. Me pin mód-sefa 

licad leng swa wel, leofa Beowulf. 
Hafast pt gefered pt bam folcum sceal, 
Géata leodum ond Gar-Denum, 

sib gemé&ne ond sacu restan, 
inwit-nipas, pe hte &r drugon, 

wesan, benden ic wealde  widan rices, 
mapmas gem&ne, manig operne 

godum gegréttan ofer ganotes bed; 
sceal hring-naca ofer heafu bringan 

lac ond luf-tācen. Ic pa léode wat 


ge wid feond ge wid freond fæste geworhte, 


zeghwees unt&le ealde wisan.” 
Da git him eorla hléo inne gesealde, 
mago Healfdenes mabmas twelfe, 


BEOWULF 


1840 


1850 


1860 


as a king’s son to the court of the Geats, 
he will find many friends. Foreign places 
yield more to one who is himself worth meeting.” 


Hrothgar spoke and answered him: Hrothgar declares 
“The Lord in His wisdom sent you those words be king of the Gods 
and they came from the heart. I have never heard 
so young a man make truer observations. 

You are strong in body and mature in mind, 
impressive in speech. If it should come to pass 

that Hrethel’s descendant dies beneath a spear, 

if deadly battle or the sword blade or disease 

fells the prince who guards your people 

and you are still alive, then I firmly believe 

the seafaring Geats won't find a man 

worthier of acclaim as their king and defender 

than you, if only you would undertake 

the lordship of your homeland. My liking for you 
deepens with time, dear Beowulf. 

What you have done is to draw two peoples, 

the Geat nation and us neighbouring Danes, 

into shared peace and a pact of friendship 

in spite of hatreds we have harboured in the past. 
For as long as I rule this far-flung land 

treasures will change hands and each side will treat 
the other with gifts; across the gannet's bath, 

over the broad sea, whorled prows will bring 
presents and tokens. I know your people 

are beyond reproach in every respect, 

steadfast in the old way with friend or foe.” 


Then the earls’ defender furnished the hero Gifts presented, 


with twelve treasures and told him to set out, farewell taken 


BEOWULF 127 


that Beowulf is fit to 


1870 


1880 


1890 


128 


hét hine mid p&m lacum  leode sw&se 

sécean on gesyntum, snide eft cuman. 

Gecyste ba cyning epelum god, 

béoden Scyldinga degn betstan 

ond be healse genam;  hruron him téaras, 

blonden-feaxum. Him wes bega wen, 

ealdum, infrodum,  opres swidor, 

pet hie seoóóan nā geseon moston, 

modige on meple. Wes him se man to pon leof, 

bat he bone bréost-wylm  forberan ne mehte; 

ac him on hrepre hyge-bendum fest 

efter deorum men  dyrne langað 

beorn wid blode. Him Béowulf panan, 

gud-rinc gold-wlanc, graes-moldan tred, 

since hremig.  S&-genga bad 

agend-fréan, sé be on ancre rad. 

Pa wes on gange gifu Hroógares 

oft gezhted. bet wes an cyning, 

&ghwes orleahtre, oppzt hine yldo benam 

magenes wynnum sé pe oft mangeum scod. 
Cwom pa to flode fela-modigra 

heg-stealdra héap;  hring-net béron, 

locene leodo-syrcan. Land-weard onfand 

eft-sid eorla, swa he &r dyde; 

nó hé mid hearme of hlides nosan 

gestas grétte, ac him togéanes rad; 

cwaó bat wil-cuman  Wedera leodum 

scapan scir-hame tō scipe foron. 

bà wes on sande  s&-geap naca 

hladen here-wédum, — hringed-stefna 

mearum ond maómum; mest hlifade 


BEOWULF 


1870 


1880 


1890 


sail with those gifts safely home 
to the people he loved, but to return promptly. 
And so the good and grey-haired Dane, 
that high-born king, kissed Beowulf 
and embraced his neck, then broke down 
in sudden tears. Two forebodings 
disturbed him in his wisdom, but one was stronger: 
nevermore would they meet each other 
face to face. And such was his affection 
that he could not help being overcome: 
his fondness for the man was so deep-founded, 
it warmed his heart and wound the heartstrings 
tight in his breast. 

The embrace ended 
and Beowulf, glorious in his gold regalia, 
stepped the green earth. Straining at anchor 
and ready for boarding, his boat awaited him. 
So they went on their journey, and Hrothgar’s generosity 
was praised repeatedly. He was a peerless king 
until old age sapped his strength and did him 
mortal harm, as it has done so many. 


The Geats march 
back to the shore 


Down to the waves then, dressed in the web 

of their chain-mail and warshirts the young men marched 
in high spirits. The coast-guard spied them, 

thanes setting forth, the same as before. 

His salute this time from the top of the cliff 

was far from unmannerly; he galloped to meet them 
and as they took ship in their shining gear, 

he said how welcome they would be in Geatland. 
Then the broad hull was beached on the sand 

to be cargoed with treasure, horses and war-gear. 
The curved prow motioned; the mast stood high 


BEOWULF 129 


1887 


1904 


1970 


1980 


1990 


2000 


2140 


Beowulf 


Beowulf excerpt contains lines 1887—2510, and is taken from the Seamus Heaney translation, 2000. 


[Beowulf Returns Home continuation] 
mortal harm, as it has done so many. 


[.-.] 
2150 
Then the keel plunged 
And shook in the sea; and they sailed from Denmark. 


E 


Heroic Beowulf and his band of men 

Crossed the wide strand, striding along 

The sandy foreshore; the sun shone, 

The world’s candle warmed them from the south 
As they hastened to where, as they had heard, 
The young king, Ongentheow’s killer 

And his people’s protector, was dispensing rings 
Inside his bawn. Beowulf s return 

Was reported to Hygelac as soon as possible, 
News that the captain was now in the enclosure, 
His battle-brother back from the fray 

Alive and well, walking back to the hall. 

Room was quickly made, on the king’s orders, 
And the troops filed across the cleared floor. 


2160 


2180 
After Hygelac had offered greetings 
To his loyal thane in lofty speech, 
He and his kinsman, that hale survivor, 
Sat face to face. Haereth’s daughter 
Moved about with the mead-jug in her hand, 
Taking care of the company, filling the cups 
That warriors held out. Then Hygelac began 
To put courteous questions to his old comrade 
In the high hall. He hankered to know 
Every tale the Sea-Geats had to tell. 

2190 
“How did you fare on your foreign voyage, 
Dear Beowulf, when you abruptly decided 
To sail away across the salt water 
And fight at Heorot? Did you help Hrothgar 
Much in the end? Could you ease the prince 
Of his well-known troubles? Your undertaking 
Cast my spirits down, I dreaded the outcome 
Of your expedition and pleaded with you 
Long and hard to leave the killer be, 
Let the South-Danes settle their own 
Blood-feud with Grendel. So God be thanked 
Iam granted this sight of you, safe and sound.” 

2200 

Beowulf, son of Ecgtheow, spoke: 
“What happened, lord Hygelac, is hardly a secret 
Any more among men in this world-- 


[...] 


(Beowulf tells of his adventure in Denmark) 


[...] 


I barely managed 
To escape with my life; my time had not yet come. 
But Halfdane’s heir, the shelter of those earls, 
Again endowed me with gifts in abundance. 


2210 


“Thus the king acted with due custom. 


Beowulf 


I was paid and recompensed completely, 
Given full measure and the freedom to choose 
From Hrothgar’s treasures by Hrothgar himself. 
These, King Hygelac, I am happy to present 
To you as gifts. It is still upon your grace 
That all favor depends. I have few kinsman 
Who are close, my king, except for your kind self.” 
Then he order the boar-framed standard to be brought, 
The battle-topping helmet, the mail-shirt gray as hoar-frost 
And the precious war-sword; and proceeded with his speech. 
“When Hrothgar presented this war-gear to me 
He instructed, my lord, to give you some account 
Of why it signifies his special favor. 
He said it had belonged to his older brother, 
King Heorogar, who had long kept it, 
But that Heorogar had never bequeathed it 
To his son Heoroweard, that worthy scion, 
Loyal as he was. 
Enjoy it well.” 


[.-.] 


Thus Beowuld bore himself with valor; 

He was formidable in battle yet behaved with honor 
And took no advantage: never cut down 

A comrade who was drunk, kept his temper 

And, warrior that he was, watched and controlled 
His God-sent strength and his outstanding 
Natural powers. He had been poorly regarded 
For a long time, was taken by the Geats 

For less than he was worth: and their lord too 
Had never much esteemed him in the mead-hall. 
They firmly believed that he lacked force, 

That the prince was a weakling; but presently 
Every affront to his deserving was reversed. 


The battle-famed king, bulwark of his earls, 
Ordered a gold-chased heirloom of Hrethel’s 
To be brought in; it was the best example 

Of a gem-studded sword in the Geat treasury. 
This he laid on Beowulf’s lap 

And then rewarded him with land as well, 
Seven thousand hides, and a hall and a throne. 
Both owned land by birth in that country, 
Ancestral ground; but the greater right 

And sway were inherited by the higher born. 


[The Dragon Wakes] 


A lot was to happen in later days 
In the fury of battle. Hygelac fell 
And the shelter of Heardred’s shield proved useless 
Against the fierce aggression of the Shylfings: 
Ruthless swordsmen, seasoned campaigners, 
They came against him and his conquering nation, 
And with cruel force cut him down 
So that afterwards 

The wide kingdom 
Reverted to Beowulf. He ruled it well 
For fifty winters, grew old and wise 
As warden of the land 

Until one began 

To dominate the dark, a dragon on the prowl 
From the steep vaults of a stone-roofed barrow 
Where he guarded a hoard; there was a hidden passage, 


85 


2220 


2280 


2290 


2300 


2310 


2320 


Unknown to men, but someone managed 2330 
To enter by it and interfere 

With the heathen trove. He had handled and removed 

A gem-studded goblet; it gained him nothing, 

Though with a thief’s wiles he had outwitted 

The sleeping dragon; that drove him into rage, 


As the people of that country would soon discover. 


[e] 

For three centuries, this scourge of the people 2340 
Had stood guard on that stoutly protected 

Underground treasury, until the intruder 

Unleashed its fury; he hurried to his lord 

With the gold-plated cup and made his plea 

To be reinstated. Then the vault was rifled, 

The ring-hoard robbed, and the wretched man 

Had his request granted. His master gazed 

On that find from the past for the first time. 


When the dragon awoke, trouble flared again. 
He rippled down the rock, writhing with anger 
When he saw the footprints of the prowler who had stolen 
Too close to his dreaming head. 
So may a man not marked by fate 
Easily escape exile and woe 
By the grace of God. 
The hoard-guardian 
Scorched the ground as he scoured and hunted 
For the trespasser who had troubled his sleep. 
Hot and savage, he kept circling and circling 
The outside of the mound. No man appeared 
In that desert waste, but he worked himself up 
By imagining battle; then back in he'd go 
In search of the cup, only to discover 
Signs that someone had stumbled upon 
The golden treasures. The guardian of the mound, 
The hoard-watcher, waited for the gloaming 
With fierce impatience; his pent-up fury 
At the loss of the vessel made him long to hit back 
And lash out in flames. Then, to his delight, 
The day waned and he could wait no longer 
Behind the wall, but hurtled forth 
In a fiery blaze. The first to suffer 
Were the people on the land, but before long 
It was their treasure-giver who would come to grief. 


2350 


2400 


2410 


The dragon began to belch out flames 

And burn bright homesteads; there was a hot glow 
That scared everyone, for the vile sky-winger 
Would leave nothing alive in his wake. 
Everywhere the havoc he wrought was in evidence. 
Far and near, the Geat nation 

Bore the brunt of his brutal assaults 

And virulent hate. Then back to the hoard 

He would dart before daybreak, to hide in his den. 
He had swinged the land, swathed it in flame, 

In fire and burning, and now he felt secure 

In the vaults of his burrow; but his trust was unavailing. 


2420 


Then Beowulf was given bad news, 

A hard truth: his own home, 

The best of buildings, had been burnt to a cinder, 
The throne-room of the Geats. It threw the hero 
Into deep anguish and darkened his mood: 

The wise man thought he must have thwarted 


2510 


86 Beowulf 


Ancient ordinance of the eternal Lord, 

Broken His commandment. His mind was in turmoil, 
Unaccustomed anxiety and gloom 

Confused his brain; the fire-dragon 

Had rased the coastal region and reduced 

Forts and earthworks to dust and ashes, 

So the war-king planned and plotted his revenge. 
The warriors' protector, prince of the hall-troop, 
Ordered a marvelous all-iron shield 

From his smithy works. He well knew 

That linden boards would let him down 

And timber burn. After many trials, 

He was destined to face the end of his days 

In this mortal world; as was the dragon, 

For all his leasehold on the treasure. 


Yet the prince of the rings was too proud 

To line up with a large army 

Against the sky-plague. He had scant regard 

For the dragon as a threat, no dread at all 

Of its courage or strength, for he had kept going 
Often in the past, through perils and ordeals 

Of every sort, after he had purged 

Hrothgar's hall, triumphed in Heorot 

And beaten Grendel. He outgrappled the monster 
And his evil kin. 


[...] 


And so the son of Ecgtheow had survived 

Every extreme, excelling himself 

In daring and in danger, until the day arrived 

When he had to come face to face with the dragon. 
The lord of the Geats took eleven comrades 

And went in a rage to reconnoiter. 

By then he had discovered the cause of the affliction 
Being visited on the people. The precious cup 

Had come to him from the hand of the finder, 

The one who had started all this strife 

And was now added as a thirteenth to their number. 
They press-ganged and compelled this poor creature 
To be their guide. Against his will 

He led them to the earth-vault he alone knew, 

An underground barrow near the sea-billows 

And heaving waves, heaped inside 

With exquisite metalwork. The one who stood guard 
Was dangerous and watchful, warden of that trove 
Buried under earth: no easy bargain 

Would be made in that place by any man. 


The veteran king sat down on the cliff-top. 

He wished good luck to the Geats who had shared 
His hearth and his gold. He was sad at heart, 
Unsettled yet ready, sensing his own death. 

His fate hovered near, unknowable but certain: 

It would soon claim his coffered soul, 

Part life from limb. Before long 

The prince's spirit would spin free from his body. 


[.-.] 


[Beowulf Attacks the Dragon] 


Beowulf spoke, made a formal boast 


1900 


1910 


1920 


130 


ofer Hróógáres hord-gestréonum. 
He p&m bat-wearde bunden golde 

swurd gesealde, bat he syópan wes i966 

on meodu-bence mabme py weorpra, 

yrfe-lafe. Gewat him on naca, 

drefan déop water, Dena land ofgeaf. 

Pa wes be maste mere-hregla sum, 

segl sale fæst, sund-wudu punede; 

no b&r weg-flotan wind ofer yóum 

sides getwefde. S#-genga for, 

fleat famig-heals ford ofer de, 

bunden-stefna ofer brim-stréamas, 

pet hie Géata clifu ongitan meahton, 

cübe nessas; céol up gebrang 

lyft-geswenced, on lande stod. imd 
Hrape was æt holme byd-weard geara, 

sé be ær lange tid léofra manna 

füs æt farode feor wlatode. 

S#lde to sande  sid-fzpme scip 

oncer-bendum fest, py læs hym ypa órym 

wudu wynsuman forwrecan meahte. 

Het ba up beran æpþelinga gestréon, 

fretwe ond fat-gold; næs him feor banon 

tō gesecanne  sinces bryttan, 

Higelac Hrepling, þēr et ham wunad 

selfa mid gesióum — s&-wealle néah. ion 
Bold wes betlic,  brego-rof cyning, 

héah on healle, Hygd swide geong, 


BEOWULF 


above Hrothgar’s riches in the loaded hold. 


The guard who had watched the boat was given 
a sword with gold fittings and in future days 
that present would make him a respected man 
at his place on the mead-bench. 
Then the keel plunged 
and shook in the sea; and they sailed from Denmark. 


Right away the mast was rigged with its sea-shawl; 
sail-ropes were tightened, timbers drummed 

and stiff winds kept the wave-crosser 

skimming ahead; as she heaved forward, 

her foamy neck was fleet and buoyant, 

a lapped prow loping over currents, 

until finally the Geats caught sight of coastline 

and familiar cliffs. The keel reared up, 

wind lifted it home, it hit on the land. 


The harbour guard came hurrying out 

to the rolling water: he had watched the offing 
long and hard, on the lookout for those friends. 
With the anchor cables, he moored their craft 
right where it had beached, in case a backwash 
might catch the hull and carry it away. 

Then he ordered the prince’s treasure-trove 

to be carried ashore. It was a short step 

from there to where Hrethel’s son and heir, 
Hygelac the gold-giver, makes his home 

on a secure cliff, in the company of retainers. 


The building was magnificent, the king majestic, 
ensconced in his hall; and although Hygd, his queen, 


BEOWULF 


They sail from 
Denmark 


They arrive at 
Hygelac’s stronghold 


131 


1930 


1940 


1950 


132 


wis, wél-pungen, péah ðe wintra lýt 

under burh-locan  gebiden hebbe, 

Harepes dohtor, næs hio hnah swa peah, 

né to gnéad gifa Geata leodum 1930 
Modpryóo weg 

fremu folces cwen,  firen' ondrysne. 

Nà&nig bet dorste | deor genepan 

swésra gesida, nefne sin-fréa, 

pet hire an deges éagum starede; 

ac him wel-bende weotode tealde, 
hand-gewripene; hrabe seobdan wes 

efter mund-gripe méce gebinged, 

pet hit scedden-m#l scyran moste, 

cwealm-bealu cydan. Ne bid swylc cwénlic peaw 
idese to efnanne, péah de hio &nlicu sy, 1940 
batte freodu-webbe — feores onsé&ce 

efter lige-torne léofne mannan. 

Hüru pet onhohsnode Hemminges még. 
Ealo-drincende Oder sédan, 

pet hio léod-bealewa læs gefremede, 

syððan &rest weard 


mapm-gestreona; 


inwit-nida, 
gyfen gold-hroden geongum cempan, 

zdelum diore, syddan hio Offan flet 

ofer fealone flod be fader lare 

side gesohte. D&r hio syddan well 1950 
in gum-stole, gode mire, 

lif-gesceafta  lifigende breac, 

hiold heah-lufan wid hzelepa brego, 

ealles mon-cynnes mine gefrége 

pone sélestan bi s&m tweonum, 

eormen-cynnes. Fordam Offa wes 

geofum ond gūðum, gar-céne man 


BEOWULF 


was young, a few short years at court, Queen Hygd 
her mind was thoughtful and her manners sure. Vitus Tue 
story of Queen 


Haereth's daughter behaved generously Modthryth, Hygd's 


opposite, is told by 


and stinted nothing when she distributed Eois 
poe 


bounty to the Geats. 
Great Queen Modthryth 
perpetrated terrible wrongs. 
If any retainer ever made bold 
to look her in the face, if an eye not her lord's 
stared at her directly during daylight, 
the outcome was sealed: he was kept bound 
in hand-tightened shackles, racked, tortured 
until doom was pronounced—death by the sword, 
slash of blade, blood-gush and death qualms 
in an evil display. Even a queen 
outstanding in beauty must not overstep like that. 
A queen should weave peace, not punish the innocent 
with loss of life for imagined insults. 
But Hemming's kinsman put a halt to her ways 
and drinkers round the table had another tale: 
she was less of a bane to people's lives, 
less cruel-minded, after she was married 
to the brave Offa, a bride arrayed 
in her gold finery, given away 
by a caring father, ferried to her young prince 
over dim seas. In days to come 
she would grace the throne and grow famous 
for her good deeds and conduct of life, 
her high devotion to the hero king 
who was the best king, it has been said, 
between the two seas or anywhere else 
on the face of the earth. Offa was honoured 
far and wide for his generous ways, 


BEOWULF 133 


1960 


1970 


1980 


134 


wide geweordod; wisddme héold 
&del sinne. Ponon Eomér wóc 
hzledum to helpe, Hemminges még, 
nefa Garmundes, nida creftig. 

Gewat him 04 se hearda mid his hond-scole 
sylf efter sande s#-wong tredan, 
wide warodas; woruld-candel scan, 
sigel sidan fis. Hi sid drugon, 
elne ge€odon, tō dzs de eorla hleo, 
bonan Ongenbéoes burgum in innan, 
geongne güó-cyning gddne gefrünon 
hringas délan. Higelàce wes 
sid Béowulfes snüde gecyded, 
pet ðr on wordig wigendra hleo, 
lind-gestealla lifigende cwóm, 
heaóo-laces hal td hofe gongan. 
Hrade wes gerymed, swa se rica bebéad, 
féde-gestum flet innanweard. 

Geszt bà wid sylfne, se 04 secce genes, 
mag wid m&ge, syddan man-dryhten 
burh hleoóor-cwyde holdne gegrétte 
méaglum wordum. Meodu-scencum 
hwearf geond pet heal-reced Heredes dohtor, 
lufode 64 léode, lid-w&ge ber 
H&dnum to handa. Higelac ongan 
sinne geseldan in sele pam héan 
fegrefricgcean; hyne fyrwet brec, 
hwylce S&-Géata  sióas waron: 

“Hū lomp éow on lade, lēofa Biowulf, 
ba 60 feringa feorr gehogodest 


BEOWULF 


his fighting spirit and his far-seeing 
defence of his homeland; from him there sprang Eomer, 
Garmund’s grandson, kinsman of Hemming, 


his warriors’ mainstay and master of the field. 


Heroic Beowulf and his band of men 

crossed the wide strand, striding along 

the sandy foreshore; the sun shone, 

the world’s candle warmed them from the south 
as they hastened to where, as they had heard, 
the young king, Ongentheow’s killer 

and his people’s protector, was dispensing rings 
inside his bawn. Beowulf’s return 

was reported to Hygelac as soon as possible, 
news that the captain was now in the enclosure, 
his battle-brother back from the fray 

alive and well, walking to the hall. 

Room was quickly made, on the king’s orders, 
and the troops filed across the cleared floor. 


After Hygelac had offered greetings 

to his loyal thane in lofty speech, 

he and his kinsman, that hale survivor, 

sat face to face. Haereth’s daughter 

moved about with the mead-jug in her hand, 
taking care of the company, filling the cups 
that warriors held out. Then Hygelac began 
to put courteous questions to his old comrade 
in the high hall. He hankered to know 

every tale the Sea-Geats had to tell. 


“How did you fare on your foreign voyage, 
dear Beowulf, when you abruptly decided 


BEOWULF 


Beowulf and his 
troop are welcomed 
in Hygelac’s hall 


Hygelac questions 
Beowulf 


135 


1990 


2000 


2010 


136 


szecce secean ofer sealt weter, 

hilde to Hiorote? Ac di Hroógare 

wid-cüÓne wéan wihte gebéttest, 

mérum óéodne? Ic Ózs mod-ceare 

sorh-wylmum séad, side ne truwode 

leofes mannes. Ic 6é lange bed, 

pet 60 pone wel-gést wihte ne grétte, 

lete Suó-Dene  sylfe geweordan 

glide wid Grendel. Gode ic panc secge, 

pes de ic 6@ gesundne gesēon moste.” 
Biowulf madelode, bearn Ecgdioes: 

“Pet is undyrne, | dryhten Higelac, 

mēru geméting monegum fira, 

hwylc orleg-hwil uncer Grendles 

wearó on 6am wange, pér hé worna fela 

Sige-Scyldingum sorge gefremede, 

yrmóe to aldre; ic det eall gewrzc, 

swa begylpan ne bearf  Grendeles maga 

&nig ofer eoróan  üht-hlem pone, 

sé de lengest leofaó  laóan cynnes, 

facne bifongen. Ic ðær furóum cwom 

to 6am hring-sele Hrddgar grétan; 

sona mé se mæra mago Healfdenes, 

syððan hé mod-sefan minne cüóe, 

wid his sylfes sunu setl get&hte. 

Weorod wes on wynne: ne seah ic widan feorh 

under heofones hwealf  heal-sittendra 

medu-dream maran. Hwilum mēru cwén, 

fridu-sibb folca, flet eall geondhwearf, 

b&dde byre geonge; oft hio béah-wridan 

secge sealde, ér hie to setle geong; 


BEOWULF 


1990 


2000 


2010 


to sail away across the salt water 

and fight at Heorot? Did you help Hrothgar 
much in the end? Could you ease the prince 

of his well-known troubles? Your undertaking 
cast my spirits down, I dreaded the outcome 

of your expedition and pleaded with you 

long and hard to leave the killer be, 

let the South-Danes settle their own 

blood-feud with Grendel. So God be thanked 

I am granted this sight of you, safe and sound.” 


Beowulf tells what 
happened in the land 
of the Danes 


Beowulf, son of Ecgtheow, spoke: 
“What happened, Lord Hygelac, is hardly a secret 
any more among men in this world— 
myself and Grendel coming to grips 
on the very spot where he visited destruction 
on the Victory-Shieldings and violated 
life and limb, losses J avenged 
so no earthly offspring of Grendel’s 
need ever boast of that bout before dawn, 
no matter how long the last of his evil 
family survives. 
When I first landed 
I hastened to the ring-hall and saluted Hrothgar. 
Once he discovered why I had come 
the son of Halfdane sent me immediately 
to sit with his own sons on the bench. 
It was a happy gathering. In my whole life 
I have never seen mead enjoyed more 
in any hall on earth. Sometimes the queen 
herself appeared, peace-pledge between nations, 
to hearten the young ones and hand out 
a torque to a warrior, then take her place. 


BEOWULF 137 


2020 


2030 


2040 


2050 


138 


hwilum for duguóe dohtor Hroógàres 2020 

eorlum on ende ealu-wé&ge ber, 

pa ic Fréaware flet-sittende 

nemnan hyrde, þær hio negled-sinc 

hzledum sealde. Sio gehàten is 

geong, gold-hroden, gladum suna Frédan; 

hafaó pes geworden wine Scyldinga, 

rices hyrde, ond pat r&d talaó 

pet hé mid 6y wife wel-fehda dil, 

secca gesette. Oft seldan hwér 

zfterleod-hryre 1y¥tle hwile 

bon-gar bügeó, péah séo bryd duge! 2030 
“Meg bes bonne ofpyncan 6éodne Headobeardna 

ond þegna gehwàm — pàra leoda, 

bonne hé mid fémnan on flett g&ó 

dryht-bearn Dena, duguda biwenede. 

On him gladiaó gomelra lafe, 

heard ond hring-m#l Headabeardna gestréon, 

benden hie 6am w&pnum — wealdan moston, 

oddzt hie forléddan tö dam lind-plegan 

swése gesidas ond hyra sylfra feorh. 

sé be béah gesyhó, 

sé de eall geman 2040 


Ponne cwió zt beore, 

eald æsc-wiga, 

gar-cwealm gumena 

onginneó geómor-mód  geongum cempan 

purh hreóra gehygd, higes cunnian, 

wig-bealu weccean, ond pat word acwyó: 
* *Meaht 60, min wine, méce gecnawan, 

pone pin feder tō gefeohte ber 

under here-griman hindeman side, 

b&r hyne Dene slogon, 


—him bid grim sefa— 


dyre ren, 


BEOWULF 


Sometimes Hrothgar’s daughter distributed 

ale to older ranks, in order on the benches: 

I heard the company call her Freawaru 

as she made her rounds, presenting men 

with the gem-studded bowl, young bride-to-be 

to the gracious Ingeld, in her gold-trimmed attire. 
The friend of the Shieldings favours her betrothal: 
the guardian of the kingdom sees good in it 

and hopes this woman will heal old wounds 


He foresees the grim 
consequence of a 
proposed marriage 
and grievous feuds. 


But generally the spear 
is prompt to retaliate when a prince is killed, 
no matter how admirable the bride may be. 


"Think how the Heathobards will be bound to feel, 
their lord, Ingeld, and his loyal thanes, 

when he walks in with that woman to the feast: 
Danes are at the table, being entertained, 


When the Danes 
appear at Freawaru's 
wedding, their hosts, 
the Heathobards, 
will be stirred to 
avenge an old defeat 
honoured guests in glittering regalia, 


burnished ring-mail that was their hosts' birthright, 
looted when the Heathobards could no longer wield 
their weapons in the shield-clash, when they went down 
with their beloved comrades and forfeited their lives. 
Then an old spearman will speak while they are drinking, 
having glimpsed some heirloom that brings alive 
memories of the massacre; his mood will darken 

and heart-stricken, in the stress of his emotion, 

he will begin to test a young man's temper 

and stir up trouble, starting like this: 

"Now, my friend, don't you recognize 

your father's sword, his favourite weapon, 

the one he wore when he went out in his war-mask 

to face the Danes on that final day? 


BEOWULF 139 


2060 


2070 


140 


wéoldon wzl-stówe, syddan Widergyld leg, 


efter heleba hryre, hwate Scyldungas? 
Ni hér para banena byre nat-hwylces 
fretwum hrémig on flet gð, 

moróres gylpeó ond bone maópum byreó, 
pone pe 60 mid rihte ré&dan sceoldest" 
Manado swa ond myndgaó méla gehwylce 
sàrum wordum, oddzet sæl cymeó, 

bat se fémnan þegn fore feder dédum 
efter billes bite blod-fag swefed, 

ealdres scyldig; him se oder bonan 

losað lifigende, con him land geare. 
bonne biod abrocene on bà healfe 
ad-sweord eorla; syddan Ingelde 

weallaó wal-nióas ond him wif-lufan 
efter cear-wzllmum — colran weoróaó. 

by ic Heaóobeardna  hyldo ne telge, 
dryht-sibbe dēl Denum unfécne, 
fréondscipe festne. 

Ic sceal foró sprecan, 
gen ymbe Grendel, pet dU geare cunne, 
sinces brytta, t6 hwan syddan weard 
hond-r&és heleda. Syddan heofones gim 
glad ofer grundas, gást yrre cw6m, 
eatol &fen-grom, User néosan, 
öğr we gesunde sæl weardodon. 

Þær wes Hondscio hild ons&ge, 
feorh-bealu fégum; hé fyrmest leg, 
gyrded cempa; him Grendel wearó, 
mérum magu-begne, tō müó-bonan, 
leofes mannes lic eall forswealg. 
Nō öğ &ruütóagen  idel-hende 


BEOWULF 


2060 


2070 


After Wethergeld died and his men were doomed 
the Shieldings quickly claimed the field, 
and now here’s a son of one or other 
of those same killers coming through our hall 
overbearing us, mouthing boasts, 
and rigged in armour that by right is yours.’ 
And so he keeps on, recalling and accusing, 
working things up with bitter words 
until one of the lady’s retainers lies 
spattered in blood, split open 
on his father’s account. The killer knows 
the lie of the land and escapes with his life. 
Then on both sides the oath-bound lords 
will break the peace, a passionate hate 
will build up in Ingeld and love for his bride 
will falter in him as the feud rankles. 
I therefore suspect the good faith of the Heathobards, 
the truth of their friendship and the trustworthiness 
of their alliance with the Danes. 
But now, my lord, 

I shall carry on with my account of Grendel, 
the whole story of everything that happened 
in the hand-to-hand fight. 

After heaven's gem 
had gone mildly to earth, that maddened spirit, 
the terror of those twilights, came to attack us 
where we stood guard, still safe inside the hall. 
There deadly violence came down on Handscio 
and he fell as fate ordained, the first to perish, 
rigged out for the combat. A comrade from our ranks 
had come to grief in Grendel’s maw: 
he ate up the entire body. 
There was blood on his teeth, he was bloated and furious, 


BEOWULF 


The tale of the fight 
with Grendel 
resumed 


141 


2090 


2100 


2110 


142 


bona blodig-toó bealewa gemyndig, 
of dam gold-sele gongan wolde, 
ache megnes rof min costode, 
grapode gearo-folm. | Glof hangode 
sid ond syllic, searo-bendum fest; 
sio was orÓoncum eall gegyrwed, 
déofles creftum ond dracan fellum. 
Hē mec bar on innan unsynnigne, 
dior déd-fruma, gedōn wolde 
manigra sumne; hyt ne mihte swa, 
syððan ic on yrre upp-riht astod. 


To lang ys tō reccenne, hii ic 6am léod-sceaóan 


yfla gehwylces  ondlean forgeald, 
pér ic, péoden min, pine léode 
weordode weorcum. Hë on weg losade, 
lytle hwile līf-wynna bréac; 
hwæpþre him sio swióre swade weardade 
hand on Hiorte, ond he hean donan, 
modes geomor  mere-grund gefeoll. 

"Me bone wzl-r&s wine Scildunga 
fattan golde fela leanode, 
manegum máómum, syddan mergen com 
ond wē to symble  geseten hefdon. 
Þær wes gidd ond gléo; gomela Scilding, 
fela fricgende, feorran rehte; 
hwilum hilde-déor hearpan wynne, 
gomen-wudu grétte, hwilum gyd awrec 
soóÓ ond sarlic, hwilum syllic spell 
rehte efter rihte rtm-heort cyning; 
hwilum eft ongan eldo gebunden 
gomel gtid-wiga giogude cwidan, 


BEOWULF 


2090 


2110 


all roused up, yet still unready 

to leave the hall empty-handed; 

renowned for his might, he matched himself against me, 
wildly reaching. He had this roomy pouch, 

a strange accoutrement, intricately strung 

and hung at the ready, a rare patchwork 

of devilishly fitted dragon-skins. 

I had done him no wrong, yet the raging demon 
wanted to cram me and many another 

into this bag—but it was not to be 

once I got to my feet in a blind fury. 

It would take too long to tell how I repaid 

the terror of the land for every life he took 

and so won credit for you, my king, 

and for all your people. And although he got away 
to enjoy life's sweetness for a while longer, 

his right hand stayed behind him in Heorot, 
evidence of his miserable overthrow 

as he dived into murk on the mere bottom. 


“I got lavish rewards from the lord of the Danes 
for my part in the battle, beaten gold 

and much else, once morning came 

and we took our places at the banquet table. 
There was singing and excitement: an old reciter, 
a carrier of stories, recalled the early days. 

At times some hero made the timbered harp 
tremble with sweetness, or related true 

and tragic happenings; at times the king 

gave the proper turn to some fantastic tale, 

or a battle-scarred veteran, bowed with age, 
would begin to remember the martial deeds 


BEOWULF 


Beowulf recalls the 
feast in Heorot 


143 


2120 


2130 


2140 


144 


hilde-strengo; hreder inne wéoll, 

bonne hē wintrum frod worn gemunde. 
“Swa we b&rinne andlangne deg 

niode nàman, oóózt niht becwom 

Oder to yldum. Pa wes eft hrade 

gearo gym-wrece Grendeles modor, 

sióode sorh-full; sunu déad fornam, 

wig-hete Wedra. Wif unhyre 

hyre bearn gewreec, beorn acwealde 

ellenlice; pr wes ZEschere, 

fródan fyrn-witan, feorh üdgenge. 

Noder hy hine ne moston, syddan mergen cwom, 

déaó-werigne, Denia léode 

bronde forbzrnan, né on b&l hladan 

l&ofne mannan; hio pet lic ætbær 

féondes fedmum under firgen-stréam. 

bet wes Hroógàre hréowa tornost, 

para pe léod-fruman lange begéate. 

ba se óéoden mec dine life 

healsode hreoh-mod, þæt ic on holma gepring 

eorlscipe efnde, ealdre genédde, 

mér0o fremede; hē mē mede gehet. 

Ic 6a Óózs welmes, pé is wide cid, 

grimne gryrelicne grund-hyrde fond. 

bá&r unc hwile wes hand gemé&ne; 

holm heolfre weoll, ond ic héafde becearf 

in 6am güó-sele Grendeles modor 

éacnum ecgum. Unsdfte bonan 

feorh odferede; nes ic fége bà gýt; 

ac mé eorla hleo eft gesealde 

madma menigeo, maga Healfdenes. 


BEOWULF 


2120 


2130 


2140 


of his youth and prime and be overcome 
as the past welled up in his wintry heart. 


“We were happy there the whole day long 

and enjoyed our time until another night 

descended upon us. Then suddenly He tells about 
the vehement mother avenged her son Grendel smother 
and wreaked destruction. Death had robbed her, 
Geats had slain Grendel, so his ghastly dam 
struck back and with bare-faced defiance 

laid a man low. Thus life departed 

from the sage Aeschere, an elder wise in counsel. 
But afterwards, on the morning following, 

the Danes could not burn the dead body 

nor lay the remains of the man they loved 

on his funeral pyre. She had fled with the corpse 
and taken refuge beneath torrents on the mountain. 
It was a hard blow for Hrothgar to bear, 

harder than any he had undergone before. 

And so the heartsore king beseeched me 

in your royal name to take my chances 
underwater, to win glory 

and prove my worth. He promised me rewards. 
Hence, as is well known, I went to my encounter 
with the terror-monger at the bottom of the tarn. 
For a while it was hand-to-hand between us, 

then blood went curling along the currents 

and J beheaded Grendel's mother in the hall 

with a mighty sword. I barely managed 

to escape with my life; my time had not yet come. 
But Halfdane’s heir, the shelter of those earls, 
again endowed me with gifts in abundance. 


BEOWULF 145 


2150 


2160 


2170 


146 


“Swa se 6éod-kyning péawum lyfde; 
nealles ic 6am léanum forloren hefde, 
mzegnes mede, ac he mē madmas geaf, 
sunu Healfdenes, on minne sylfes dom; 

64 ic de, beorn-cyning, bringan wylle, 
éstum geywan. Gen is eall et dé 

lissa gelong; ic lyt hafo 

héafod-maga, nefne Hygelāc dec!” 

Hét 64 in beran eafor, héafod-segn, 
heado-stéapne helm, hare byrnan, 
güÓ-sweord geatolic, gyd efter wrec: 

“Mē ðis hilde-sceorp Hrddgar sealde, 
snotra fengel; sume worde hét, 
pet ic his rest Óe est gesegde: 
cwed pet hyt hefde Hiorogar cyning, 
léod Scyldunga, lange hwile. 

Nō 6y &rsunasinum  syllan wolde, 
hwatum Heorowearde, pbéah he him hold ware, 
bréost-gew&du. Bric ealles well!” 

Hyrde ic, pet bam fretwum — feower méaras, 
lungre, gelice last weardode, 
zppel-fealuwe; hē him est getéah 
méara ond madma. Swa sceal m&g don, 
nealles inwit-net öðrum bregdon 
dyrnum crefte, déad rénian 
hond-gesteallan. Hygelàce wes, 
nióa heardum, nefa swyde hold 
ond gehweder öðrum  hropra gemyndig. 

Hyrde ic bet hé done heals-béah Hygde gesealde, 


BEOWULF 


2150 


2160 


2170 


“Thus the king acted with due custom. 
I was paid and recompensed completely, 
given full measure and the freedom to choose 
from Hrothgar’s treasures by Hrothgar himself. 
These, King Hygelac, Iam happy to present 
to you as gifts. It is still upon your grace 
that all favour depends. I have few kinsmen 
who are close, my king, except for your kind self.” 
Then he ordered the boar-framed standard to be brought, 
the battle-topping helmet, the mail-shirt grey as hoar-frost 
and the precious war-sword; and proceeded with his 
speech. 
“When Hrothgar presented this war-gear to me 
he instructed me, my lord, to give you some account 
of why it signifies his special favour. 
He said it had belonged to his older brother, 
King Heorogar, who had long kept it, 
but that Heorogar had never bequeathed it 
to his son Heoroweard, that worthy scion, 
loyal as he was. 
Enjoy it well.” 


I heard four horses were handed over next. 
Beowulf bestowed four bay steeds 

to go with the armour, swift gallopers, 

all alike. So ought a kinsman act, 

instead of plotting and planning in secret 

to bring people to grief, or conspiring to arrange 
the death of comrades. The warrior king 

was uncle to Beowulf and honoured by his nephew: 
each was concerned for the other’s good. 


I heard he presented Hygd with a gorget, 


BEOWULF 


Beowulf presents 
Hygelac with the 
treasures he has won 


147 


2180 


2190 


148 


wrétlicne wundur-maóóum, done be him Wealhdéo 

geaf, 
Óeodnes dohtor, brio wicg somod 
swancor ond sadol-beorht; hyre syddan wes 
efter béah-dege breost geweordod. 

Swa bealdode bearn Ecgdéowes, 
guma güóum cud, godum d&édum, 
dréah efter dóme, — nealles druncne slog 
heord-genéatas; næs him hréoh sefa, 
ac hē man-cynnes méste crefte, 
gin-festan gife, be him God sealde, 
héold hilde-déor. Héan wes lange, 
swa hyne Géata bearn godne ne tealdon, 
né hyne on medo-bence  micles wyróne 
drihten Wedera gedon wolde; 
swyde wendon, bat hē sléac w&re, 
æðeling unfrom. Edwenden cwóm 
tir-Eadigum menn torna gehwylces. 

Het da eorla hléo in gefetian, 
heado-rof cyning, Hrédles lafe, 
golde gegyrede; næs mid Géatum 6a 
sinc-maóbum sélra on sweordes had; 
bat hé on Biowulfes  bearm alegde, 
ond him gesealde seofan büsendo, 
bold ond brego-st6l. Him wes bam samod 
on jam léodscipe lond gecynde, 
eard, é6el-riht, öðrum swidor, 
side rice, bam dér selra wes. 

Eft bet geiode ufaran dogrum 
hilde-hlammum, | syóóan Hygelac leg 
ond Heardrede — hilde-méceas 


BEOWULF 


2180 


2190 


2200 


the priceless torque that the prince’s daughter, 
Wealhtheow, had given him; and three horses, 
supple creatures, brilliantly saddled. 


The bright necklace would be luminous on Hygd’s breast. 


Thus Beowulf bore himself with valour; 

he was formidable in battle yet behaved with honour 
and took no advantage; never cut down 

a comrade who was drunk, kept his temper 

and, warrior that he was, watched and controlled 
his God-sent strength and his outstanding 
natural powers. He had been poorly regarded 

for a long time, was taken by the Geats 

for less than he was worth: and their lord too 
had never much esteemed him in the mead-hall. 
They firmly believed that he lacked force, 

that the prince was a weakling; but presently 
every affront to his deserving was reversed. 


The battle-famed king, bulwark of his earls, 
ordered a gold-chased heirloom of Hrethel’s 
to be brought in; it was the best example 

of a gem-studded sword in the Geat treasury. 
This he laid on Beowulf's lap 

and then rewarded him with land as well, 
seven thousand hides, and a hall and a throne. 
Both owned land by birth in that country, 
ancestral grounds; but the greater right 

and sway were inherited by the higher born. 


A lot was to happen in later days 
in the fury of battle. Hygelac fell 
and the shelter of Heardred's shield proved useless 


BEOWULF 


Beowulf 's exemplary 
life is extolled 


Hygelac presents 
Beowulf with a 
sword and great 
tracts of land 


Time passes. 
Beowulf rules the 
Geats for fifty years 


149 


2210 


2220 


2230 


150 


under bord-hreoóan tö bonan wurdon, 
6a hyne gesohtan on sige-beode 
hearde hild-frecan, Heado-Scilfingas, 
nióa genégdan  nefan Hererices: 
syððan Béowulfe  brade rice 
on hand gehwearf. Hē gehéold tela 
fifüg wintra— wes 6a frod cyning, 
eald ebel-weard— oððæt àn ongan 
deorcum nihtum,  draca ricsian 
sé de on héaum hofe hord beweotode, 
stan-beorh stéapne; stig under leg 
eldum uncüó; pér on innan giong 
niða nat-hwylc ...... gefeng 
hēðnum horde hond........... 
since fahne hē pet syddan...... 
béah ðe hé slépende — besyred wurde 
péofes crefte; bat sie diod onfand, 
bü-folc beoma, pet hé gebolgen wes. 
Nealles mid gewealdum wyrm-hord abrzc, 
sylfes willum, sé de him sare gesceod, 
ac for préa-nédlan þēow nat-hwylces 
hæleða bearna  hete-swengeas fleoh, 
zrnes bearfa, ond dér inne fealh, 
secg syn-bysig. Sona onfunde, 
pet..... 64m gyste  gryre-broga stod; 
hwæðre earm-sceapen .......... 
Sin dein sere ... Sceapen 
DE Bias ase pa hyne se fér begeat, 
sinc-fet..... b&r wes swylcra fela 
in 6am eoró-hüse  &r-gestréona, 


BEOWULF 


2210 


2220 


2230 


against the fierce aggression of the Shylfings: 
ruthless swordsmen, seasoned campaigners, 
they came against him and his conquering nation, 
and with cruel force cut him down 
so that afterwards 

the wide kingdom 
reverted to Beowulf. He ruled it well 
for fifty winters, grew old and wise 
as warden of the land 

until one began 

to dominate the dark, a dragon on the prowl 
from the steep vaults of a stone-roofed barrow 
where he guarded a hoard; there was a hidden passage, 
unknown to men, but someone managed 
to enter by it and interfere 
with the heathen trove. He had handled and removed 
a gem-studded goblet; it gained him nothing, 
though with a thief’s wiles he had outwitted 
the sleeping dragon; that drove him into rage, 
as the people of that country would soon discover. 


The intruder who broached the dragon’s treasure 
and moved him to wrath had never meant to. 
It was desperation on the part of a slave 
fleeing the heavy hand of some master, 
guilt-ridden and on the run, 

going to ground. But he soon began 

to shake with terror;...... in shock 

the wretch...............0.. 

ics State e panicked and ran 

away with the precious.......... 
metalwork. There were many other 
heirlooms heaped inside the earth-house, 


BEOWULF 


A dragon awakes. 
An accidental theft 
provokes his wrath 


151 


2240 


2250 


2260 


152 


swa hy on gear-dagum gumena nat-hwylc, 
eormen-lafe zpelan cynnes, 
panc-hycgende pér gehydde, 
déore maómas.  Ealle hie déad fornam 
&rran mélum, ond se an 0a gen 
léoda duguóe, sé ðær lengest hwearf, 
weard wine-geomor, wende bes ylcan 
pet hē lftel fac long-gestréona 
brücan moste. Beorh eall-gearo 
wunode on wonge weter-ydum néah, 
niwe be nesse, nearo-creftum fest. 
bér on innan bær eorl-gestréona 
hringa hyrde  hord-wyróne dl, 
fēttan goldes, fea worda cwæð: 

“Heald þū nū, hrüse, nū heled ne mostan, 
eorla hte! Hweet hyt ær on ðē 
gode begéaton. Gid-déad fornam, 
feorh-bealo frécne, fýra gehwylcne 
léoda minra, para de pis lif ofgeaf, 
gesawon sele-dréam; nah, hwa sweord wege 
odde feormie f#ted wage, 
drync-fet déore; dugud ellor scoc. 
Sceal se hearda helm, hyrsted golde 
fatum befeallen; feormynd swefad, 
pa de beado-griman bywan sceoldon; 
ge swylce séo here-pàd, sio æt hilde gebad 
ofer borda gebrac bite irena, 
brosnaó efter beorne; ne meg byrnan hring 
efter wig-fruman wide feran 
haleóum be healfe. Nes hearpan wyn, 
gomen gléo-béames, né god hafoc 
geond selswingeÓ, né se swifta mearh 


BEOWULF 


2240 


2250 


2260 


because long ago, with deliberate care, 
somebody now forgotten 
had buried the riches of a high-born race 
in this ancient cache. Death had come 
and taken them all in times gone by 
and the only one left to tell their tale, 
the last of their line, could look forward to nothing 
but the same fate for himself: he foresaw that his joy 
in the treasure would be brief. 
A newly constructed 
barrow stood waiting, on a wide headland 
close to the waves, its entryway secured. 
Into it the keeper of the hoard had carried 
all the goods and golden ware 
worth preserving. His words were few: 
“Now, earth, hold what earls once held 
and heroes can no more; it was mined from you first 
by honourable men. My own people 
have been ruined in war; one by one 
they went down to death, looked their last 
on sweet life in the hall. I am left with nobody 
to bear a sword or burnish plated goblets, 


put a sheen on the cup. The companies have departed. 


The hard helmet, hasped with gold, 

will be stripped of its hoops; and the helmet-shiner 
who should polish the metal of the war-mask sleeps; 
the coat of mail that came through all fights, 
through shield-collapse and cut of sword, 

decays with the warrior. Nor may webbed mail 
range far and wide on the warlord’s back 

beside his mustered troops. No trembling harp, 

no tuned timber, no tumbling hawk 

swerving through the hall, no swift horse 


BEOWULF 


Long ago, a hoard 
was hidden in the 
earth-house by the 
last survivor of a 
forgotten race 


153 


2270 


2280 


2290 


154 


burh-stede béated. Bealo-cwealm hafad 
fela feorh-cynna ford onsended!” 

Swa giomor-mod  giohóo mande, 
an efter eallum, unblide hwearf, 
deges ond nihtes, oddet déades wylm 
hran æt heortan. Hord-wynne fond 
eald üht-sceaóa opene standan, 
sé de byrnende  biorgas séced, 
nacod nid-draca, nihtes fleogeó 
fyre befangen; hyne fold-btiend 
swide ondrédad. Hē gesécean sceall 
hord on hrüsan, þēr hē h&@den gold 


waraó wintrum frod; ne byó him wihte dy sel. 


Swa se Ó&od-sceaóa  bréo hund wintra 
héold on hrisan hord-zrna sum 
éacen-creftig, oddzt hyne an abealch 
mon on mode; man-dryhtne ber 
f&ted wége, friodo-w&re bed 
hlaford sinne. Da wes hord rasod, 
onboren béaga hord, béne getióad 
feasceaftum men. Fréa scéawode 
fira fyrn-geweore forman side. 

Pa se wyrm onwōc, wroht wes geniwad; 
stone 0a efter stane, stearc-heort onfand 
feondes fot-last; hē td ford gestop 
dyrnan crefte, dracan héafde néah. 

Swa meg unfege éade gedigan 

wéan ond wrZc-siÓ, sé de Waldendes 
hyldo gehealdep. Hord-weard sohte 
georne efter grunde, wolde guman findan, 


BEOWULF 


2270 


2290 


pawing the courtyard. Pillage and slaughter 
have emptied the earth of entire peoples.” 
And so he mourned as he moved about the world, 
deserted and alone, lamenting his unhappiness 
day and night, until death’s flood 
brimmed up in his heart. 

Then an old harrower of the dark 
happened to find the hoard open, 
the burning one who hunts out barrows, 
the slick-skinned dragon, threatening the night sky 
with streamers of fire. People on the farms 
are in dread of him. He is driven to hunt out 
hoards under ground, to guard heathen gold 
through age-long vigils, though to little avail. 
For three centuries, this scourge of the people 
had stood guard on that stoutly protected 
underground treasury, until the intruder 
unleashed its fury; he hurried to his lord 
with the gold-plated cup and made his plea 
to be reinstated. Then the vault was rifled, 
the ring-hoard robbed, and the wretched man 
had his request granted. His master gazed 
on that find from the past for the first time. 


When the dragon awoke, trouble flared again. 
He rippled down the rock, writhing with anger 
when he saw the footprints of the prowler who had stolen 
too close to his dreaming head. 
So may a man not marked by fate 
easily escape exile and woe 
by the grace of God. 
The hoard-guardian 
scorched the ground as he scoured and hunted 


BEOWULF 


The dragon nests in 
the barrow and 
guards the gold 


The dragon in 
turmoil 


155 


2300 


2310 


2320 


156 


bone be him on sweofote sare geteode; 
hat ond hreoh-mód  hl&w oft ymbe-hwearf, 
ealne ütanweardne; né Ó&r £nig mon 

on b&re wéstenne; hwzóre wiges gefeh, 
beaduwe weorces; hwilum on beorh ethwearf, 
sinc-fet sohte; he pet sõna onfand, 

Óet hefde gumena sum goldes gefandod, 
héah-gestréona. Hord-weard onbad 
earfodlice, oððæt &fen cwóm. 

Wes 64 gebolgen  beorges hyrde, 

wolde selaóa lige forgyldan 

drinc-fet dyre. ba was deg sceacen 
wyrme on willan; nó on wealle leng 
bidan wolde, ac mid béle for, 

fyre gefysed. Wes se fruma egeslic 
leodum on lande, swa hyt lungre wearó 
on hyra sinc-gifan sare geendod. 

Da se gest ongan glédum spiwan, 
beorht hofu bernan; bryne-léoma stód 
eldum on andan; no ðr àht cwices 
lað lyft-floga  I&fan wolde. 

Wes bes wyrmes wig wide gesyne, 

nearo-fages niÓ nean ond feorran, 

hū se gud-sceada Geata leode 

hatode ond hynde. Hord eft gescéat 

dryht-sele dyrnne  &r deeges hwile. 

Hefde land-wara lige befangen, 

bé&le ond bronde; beorges getruwode, 

wiges ond wealles; him seo wén geleah. 
ba wes Biowulfe  broga gecyded 

snüde t6 sdde, pet his sylfes ham, 


BEOWULF 


2300 


2310 


2320 


for the trespasser who had troubled his sleep. 

Hot and savage, he kept circling and circling 

the outside of the mound. No man appeared 

in that desert waste, but he worked himself up 

by imagining battle; then back in he’d go 

in search of the cup, only to discover 

signs that someone had stumbled upon 

the golden treasures. So the guardian of the mound, 
the hoard-watcher, waited for the gloaming 

with fierce impatience; his pent-up fury 

at the loss of the vessel made him long to hit back 
and lash out in flames. Then, to his delight, 

the day waned and he could wait no longer 

behind the wall, but hurtled forth 

in a fiery blaze. The first to suffer 

were the people on the land, but before long 

it was their treasure-giver who would come to grief. 


The dragon began to belch out flames The dragon wreaks 


and burn bright homesteads; there was a hot glow "ange ois He Céals 
that scared everyone, for the vile sky-winger 

would leave nothing alive in his wake. 

Everywhere the havoc he wrought was in evidence. 

Far and near, the Geat nation 

bore the brunt of his brutal assaults 

and virulent hate. Then back to the hoard 

he would dart before daybreak, to hide in his den. 

He had swinged the land, swathed it in flame, 

in fire and burning, and now he felt secure 

in the vaults of his barrow; but his trust was unavailing. 


Then Beowulf was given bad news, Beowulf's ominous 


feelings about the 


a hard truth: his own home, 
dragon 


BEOWULF 157 


2330 


2340 


2350 


158 


bolda sélest, bryne-wylmum mealt, 
gif-stol Geata. Pat 68m godan wes 
hréow on hreóre, hyge-sorga mé&st. 
Wende se wisa, bat he Wealdende 
ofer ealde riht, &cean Dryhtne, 
bitre gebulge; brēost innan weoll 


béostrum geboncum, swa him gepywe ne wes. 


Hefde lig-draca_ léoda festen, 
éa-lond titan, eord-weard done 
glédum forgrunden; him ózs güó-kyning, 
Wedera pioden, wrece leornode. 
Heht him ba gewyrcean | wigendra hléo 
eall-irenne, eorla dryhten, 
wig-bord wr&tlic; wisse he gearwe, 
pet him holt-wudu — helpan ne meahte, 
lind wid lige. Sceolde l&n-daga 
epeling &r-god ende gebidan, 
worulde lifes, ond se wyrm somod, 
péah de hord-welan héolde lange. 

Oferhogode Qa hringa fengel, 
pet hé pone wid-flogan weorode gesohte, 
sidan herge; no hé him pa secce ondréd, 
né him bes wyrmes wig for wiht dyde, 
eafoó ond ellen, foróon hé &r fela 
nearo nedende  nióa gedigde, 
hilde-hlemma, syddan he Hrddgares, 
sigor-eadig secg, sele f€lsode 
ond æt gide forgrap  Grendeles mēgum 
laóan cynnes. 

Nō bet l&sest wes 

hond-gemóta, þær mon Hygelac sloh, 
syÓóÓan Géata cyning  güóe résum, 


BEOWULF 


2330 


2340 


2350 


the best of buildings, had been burnt to a cinder, 
the throne-room of the Geats. It threw the hero 
into deep anguish and darkened his mood: 

the wise man thought he must have thwarted 
ancient ordinance of the eternal Lord, 

broken His commandment. His mind was in turmoil, 
unaccustomed anxiety and gloom 

confused his brain; the fire-dragon 

had rased the coastal region and reduced 

forts and earthworks to dust and ashes, 

so the war-king planned and plotted his revenge. 
The warriors’ protector, prince of the hall-troop, 
ordered a marvellous all-iron shield 

from his smithy works. He well knew 

that linden boards would let him down 

and timber burn. After many trials, 

he was destined to face the end of his days 

in this mortal world; as was the dragon, 

for all his long leasehold on the treasure. 


Yet the prince of the rings was too proud 
to line up with a large army 
against the sky-plague. He had scant regard 
for the dragon as a threat, no dread at all 
of its courage or strength, for he had kept going 
often in the past, through perils and ordeals 
of every sort, after he had purged 
Hrothgar’s hall, triumphed in Heorot 
and beaten Grendel. He outgrappled the monster 
and his evil kin. 
One of his cruellest 
hand-to-hand encounters had happened 
when Hygelac, king of the Geats, was killed 


BEOWULF 


Beowulf's pride and 
prowess sustain him 


159 


2360 


2370 


2380 


160 


fréa-wine folca Frés-londum on, 

Hrédles eafora hiora-dryncum swealt, 

bille gebéaten. Ponan Biowulf com 

sylfes creefte, sund-nytte dréah; 2360 
hefde him on earme āna pritig 

hilde-geatwa, pa hē to holme stag. 

Nealles Hetware hrémge borfton 

féde-wiges, bé him foran ongéan 

linde b&ron; lýt eft becwom 

fram bam hild-frecan  hàmes niosan. 
Oferswam 04 sioleda bigong sunu Ecgdéowes, 
earm àn-haga eft to leodum; 

b&r him Hygd gebead hord ond rice, 

béagas ond brego-stol; bearne ne truwode, 

pet hē wid zel-fylcum | epel-stolas 2370 
healdan cüóe, 64 wes Hygelac dead. 

No Oy ër feasceafte  findan meahton 

æt dam æðelinge nige dinga, 

pet hē Heardrēde hlāford wére, 

oððe bone cynedom  ciosan wolde. 

Hweore hé hine on folce  freond-làrum héold, 
estum mid are, oððæt he yldra wearó, 
Weder-Géatum wéold. Hyne wr&éc-mecgas 
ofer sæ sohtan, suna Ohteres; 

hefdon hy forhealden helm Scylfinga, 

pone sélestan s&-cyninga, 2380 
para de in Swio-rice sinc brytnade, 

mérne beoden. Him pet tō mearce wearó; 

he b&r for feorme  feorh-wunde hleat, 
sweordes swengum, sunu Hygelàces; 

ond him eft gewat Ongendioes bearn 


BEOWULF 


in Friesland: the people’s friend and lord, 

Hrethel’s son, slaked a sword blade’s 

thirst for blood. But Beowulf’s prodigious 

gifts as a swimmer guaranteed his safety: 

he arrived at the shore, shouldering thirty 
battle-dresses, the booty he had won. 

There was little for the Hetware to be happy about 

as they shielded their faces and fighting on the ground 
began in earnest. With Beowulf against them, 

few could hope to return home. 


Across the wide sea, desolate and alone, 
the son of Ecgtheow swam back to his people. 
There Hygd offered him throne and authority 
as lord of the ring-hoard: with Hygelac dead, 
she had no belief in her son’s ability 
to defend their homeland against foreign invaders. 
Yet there was no way the weakened nation 
could get Beowulf to give in and agree 
to be elevated over Heardred as his lord 
or to undertake the office of kingship. 
But he did provide support for the prince, 
honoured and minded him until he matured 
as the ruler of Geatland. 

Then over sea-roads 
exiles arrived, sons of Ohthere. 
They had rebelled against the best of all 
the sea-kings in Sweden, the one who held sway 
in the Shylfing nation, their renowned prince, 
lord of the mead-hall. That marked the end 
for Hygelac’s son: his hospitality 
was mortally rewarded with wounds from a sword. 
Heardred lay slaughtered and Onela returned 


BEOWULF 


A flashback: 
Hygelac's death, 
Beowulf ’s rearguard 
action and escape 
across the sea 


Beowulf acts as 
counsellor to 
Hygelac’s heir, 
Heardred 


Heardred is 
implicated in 
Swedish feuds and 
slain 


161 


2390 


162 


hames niosan, syóóÓan Heardréd leg, 
let done brego-stol Biowulf healdan, 
Géatum wealdan; bat wes god cyning. 
Sē des léod-hryres lean gemunde 
uferan dogrum, Eadgilse wearó, 
féasceaftum fréond; folce gestépte 
ofer sæ side sunu Ohteres, 
wigum ond wépnum; hē gewræc syððan 
cealdum cear-sīðum, cyning ealdre binéat. 
Swā hē nīða gehwane genesen hæfde, 
slidra geslyhta, sunu EcgÓ10wes, 
ellen-weorca, oð done anne deg, 
bé he wid pam wyrme  gewegan sceolde. 
Gewat bà twelfa sum, torne gebolgen, 
dryhten Géata dracan scéawian. 
Hefde pa gefrünen, hwanan sio fæhð aras, 
bealo-niÓ biorna; him tō bearme cwom 
madpum-fet mére  burh des meldan hond. 
Sé wes on 6am Gréate préottéoda secg, 
sé des orleges Or onstealde, 
heft hyge-gidmor, sceolde héan donon 
wong wisian. He ofer willan giong, 
to Ges ğe he eoró-sele Anne wisse, 
hl&w under hrisan holm-wylme néh, 
yO-gewinne, sé wes innan full 
wretta ond wīra. Weard unhiore, 
gearo gud-freca  gold-maómas héold, 
eald under eordan; nes bet yóe ceap 
togegangenne gumena &nigum. 
Geset 64 on nesse  niÓ-heard cyning 


BEOWULF 


2390 


2410 


to the land of Sweden, leaving Beowulf 
to ascend the throne, to sit in majesty 
and rule over the Geats. He was a good king. 


In days to come, he contrived to avenge 

the fall of his prince; he befriended Eadgils 

when Eadgils was friendless, aiding his cause 
with weapons and warriors over the wide sea, 
sending him men. The feud was settled 

on a comfortless campaign when he killed Onela. 


And so the son of Ecgtheow had survived 

every extreme, excelling himself 

in daring and in danger, until the day arrived 

when he had to come face to face with the dragon. 
The lord of the Geats took eleven comrades 

and went in a rage to reconnoitre. 

By then he had discovered the cause of the affliction 
being visited on the people. The precious cup 

had come to him from the hand of the finder, 

the one who had started all this strife 

and was now added as a thirteenth to their number. 
They press-ganged and compelled this poor creature 
to be their guide. Against his will 

he led them to the earth-vault he alone knew, 

an underground barrow near the sea-billows 

and heaving waves, heaped inside 

with exquisite metalwork. The one who stood guard 
was dangerous and watchful, warden of that trove 
buried under earth: no easy bargain 

would be made in that place by any man. 


The veteran king sat down on the cliff-top. 


BEONWULF 


Beowulf inherits the 
kingship, settles the 
feuding 


The day of 
reckoning: Beowulf 
and his troop 
reconnoitre 


163 


2430 


2440 


164 


benden h&lo abéad  heoró-geneatum, 

gold-wine Géata. Him wes geómor sefa, 

wáfre ond wel-fis, wyrd ungemete néah, a 
sé done gomelan  grétan sceolde, 

sécean sawle hord, sundur ged&lan 

lif wid lice; no bon lange wes 

feorh ebelinges fl&sce bewunden. 

Biowulf mabelade, bearn Ecgdéowes: 
“Fela ic on giogode giid-r&ésa genes, 
orleg-hwila; ic bat eall gemon. 

Ic wes syfan-wintre, ba mec sinca baldor, 
fréa-wine folca æt minum feder genam. 
Héold mec ond hefde — Hréóel cyning, 

geaf mé sinc ond symbel, sibbe gemunde; 
nes ic him to life  laóra owihte 

beorn in burgum bonne his bearna hwylc, 
Herebeald ond Hedcyn, oððe Hygelac min. 
Wes bam yldestan ungedéfelice 

máges dédum_ morbor-bed stréd, 

syððan hyne Hedcyn of horn-bogan, 

his fréa-wine flane geswencte, 

miste mercelses ond his m&g ofscét, 

broóor öðerne, blödigan gare. 

Þæt wæs feoh-lēas gefeoht, fyrenum gesyngad, 
hreóre hyge-méde; sceolde hwæðre swa peah 


2430 


2440 


æðeling unwrecen ealdres linnan. 

“Swa bið geomorlic gomelum ceorle 
to gebidanne, pet his byre ride 
giong on galgan. Ponne hé gyd wrece, 
sārigne sang, bonne his sunu hangaó 
hrefne to hrodre ond hé him helpe ne meg, 
eald ond infrōd, &nige gefremman. 


BEOWULF 


He wished good luck to the Geats who had shared 
his hearth and his gold. He was sad at heart, 
unsettled yet ready, sensing his death. 

His fate hovered near, unknowable but certain: 

it would soon claim his coffered soul, 

part life from limb. Before long 

the prince’s spirit would spin free from his body. 


Beowulf, son of Ecgtheow, spoke: 

“Many a skirmish I survived when I was young 
and many times of war: I remember them well. 
At seven, I was fostered out by my father, 

left in the charge of my people’s lord. 

King Hrethel kept me and took care of me, 

was open-handed, behaved like a kinsman. 
While I was his ward, he treated me no worse 

as a wean about the place than one of his own boys, 
Herebeald and Haethcyn, or my own Hygelac. 
For the eldest, Herebeald, an unexpected 
deathbed was laid out, through a brother’s doing, 
when Haethcyn bent his horn-tipped bow 

and loosed the arrow that destroyed his life. 

He shot wide and buried a shaft 

in the flesh and blood of his own brother. 

That offence was beyond redress, a wrongfooting 
of the heart’s affections; for who could avenge 
the prince’s life or pay his death-price? 

It was like the misery felt by an old man 

who has lived to see his son’s body 

swing on the gallows. He begins to keen 

and weep for his boy, watching the raven 

gloat where he hangs: he can be of no help. 

The wisdom of age is worthless to him. 


BEOWULF 


Beowulf 's 
forebodings 


He recalls his early 
days as a ward at 
King Hrethel's court 


An accidental killing 
and its sad 
consequences for 
Hrethel 


Hrethel's loss 
reflected in "The 
Father's Lament” 


165 


2450 


2460 


2470 


166 


Symble bid gemyndgad morna gehwylce 
eaforan ellor-siÓó; 66res ne gymed 
to gebidanne burgum in innan 
yrfe-weardas, bonne se an hafaó 
purh déades nyd | d&da gefondad. 
Gesyhó sorh-cearig on his suna büre 
win-sele westne, wind-gereste, 
réote berofene; ridend swefaó, 
haleóin hoÓóman; nis b&r hearpan swég, 
gomen in geardum,  swylce ó&r itt w&ron. 
“Gewited bonne on sealman, | sorh-leoó gzeleó, 
an efter anum; pthte him eall to rim, 
wongas ond wic-stede. Swa Wedra helm 
efter Herebealde  heortan sorge 
weallinde weg; wihte ne meahte 
on 6am feorh-bonan f&ghde gebétan; 
no óy &r hé pone heado-rinc hatian ne meahte 
laóum dédum, péah him leof ne wes. 
Hē 6a mid bare sorhge, | sio pe him sare belamp, 
gum-dream ofgeaf, Godes leoht gecéas; 
eaferum l&fde, swa deó éadig mon, 
lond ond leod-byrig, pa hé of life gewat. 
“Pa wes synn ond sacu Sweéona ond Géata; 
ofer wid water wrōht geméne, 
here-nió hearda, | syóóan Hrédel swealt, 
odde him Ongenóeowes  eaferan w&ran 
frome, fyrd-hwate; fréode ne woldon 
ofer heafo healdan, ac ymb Hréosna-beorh 
eatolne inwit-scear oft gefremedon. 
Pet m&g-wine mine gewr&can, 
f&hde ond fyrene, swa hyt gefrége wes, 


BEOWULF 


2450 


2470 


2480 


Morning after morning, he wakes to remember 
that his child is gone; he has no interest 
in living on until another heir 
is born in the hall, now that his first-born 
has entered death’s dominion forever. 
He gazes sorrowfully at his son’s dwelling, 
the banquet hall bereft of all delight, 
the windswept hearthstone; the horsemen are sleeping, 
the warriors under ground; what was is no more. 
No tunes from the harp, no cheer raised in the yard. 
Alone with his longing, he lies down on his bed 
and sings a lament; everything seems too large, 
the steadings and the fields. 

Such was the feeling 
of loss endured by the lord of the Geats 
after Herebeald’s death. He was helplessly placed 
to set to rights the wrong committed, 
could not punish the killer in accordance with the law 
of the blood-feud, although he felt no love for him. 
Heartsore, wearied, he turned away 
from life’s joys, chose God’s light 
and departed, leaving buildings and lands 
to his sons, as a man of substance will. 


“Then over the wide sea Swedes and Geats 
battled and feuded and fought without quarter. 
Hostilities broke out when Hrethel died. 
Ongentheow’s sons were unrelenting, 

refusing to make peace, campaigning violently 
from coast to coast, constantly setting up 
terrible ambushes around Hreasnahill. 

My own kith and kin avenged 

these evil events, as everybody knows, 


BEOWULF 


Beowulf continues 
his account of wars 
between the Geats 
and the Swedes 


167 


2490 


2500 


2510 


168 


béah ðe oóer his ealdre gebohte, 

heardan céape; Haócynne wearó, 

Géata dryhtne, gid ons&ge. 

bà ic on morgne gefregn még oóerne 

billes ecgum on bonan stélan, 

b&r Ongenpéow  Eofores niosad; 

giid-helm toglad, gomela Scylfing 

hréas heoro-blac; hond gemunde 

f&hóo genoge, feorh-sweng ne ofteah. 
“Ic him ba maómas, pe hé mé sealde, 

geald æt güde, swā me gifede wes, 

léohtan sweorde; hé me lond forgeaf, 

eard, édel-wyn. Nes him &nig pearf, 

pet hé to Gifóum oððe to Gar-Denum 

oððe in Swio-rice sécean purfe 

wyrsan wig-frecan, weorde gecypan. 

Symle ic him on feóan  beforan wolde, 

āna on orde, ond swa tō aldre sceall 

sæcce fremman,  benden pis sweord þolað, 

pet mec &r ond siÓ oft gel&ste, 

syððan ic for dugedum Deghrefne weard 

tō hand-bonan, Higa cempan. 

Nalles he 64 fretwe Frés-cyninge, 

breost-weorOunge bringan moste, 

ac in campe gecrong cumbles hyrde, 

zpeling on elne; ne wes ecg bona, 

ac him hilde-grap heortan wylmas, 

ban-hüs gebrec. Nt sceall billes ecg, 

hond ond heard sweord ymb hord wigan.” 
Beowulf maóelode, béot-wordum sprec 

niehstan side: “Ic genédde fela 


BEOWULF 


2490 


2500 


2510 


but the price was high: one of them paid 
with his life. Haethcyn, lord of the Geats, 
met his fate there and fell in the battle. 


Then, as I have heard, Hygelac’s sword The Swedish king, 
was raised in the morning against Ongentheow, Capertee Aies at 
the hands of Eofor, 


his brother’s killer. When Eofor cleft one of Hygelac's 
the old Swede's helmet, halved it open, thanes 

he fell, death-pale: his feud-calloused hand 

could not stave off the fatal stroke. 


Beowulf recalls his 
proud days in 
Hygelac's retinue 


“The treasures that Hygelac lavished on me 

I paid for when I fought, as fortune allowed me, 
with my glittering sword. He gave me land 

and the security land brings, so he had no call 
to go looking for some lesser champion, 

some mercenary from among the Gifthas 

or the Spear-Danes or the men of Sweden. 

I marched ahead of him, always there 

at the front of the line; and I shall fight like that 
for as long as I live, as long as this sword 

shall last, which has stood me in good stead 
late and soon, ever since I killed 

Dayraven the Frank in front of the two armies. 
He brought back no looted breastplate 

to the Frisian king, but fell in battle, 

their standard-bearer, high-born and brave. 

No sword blade sent him to his death, 

my bare hands stilled his heartbeats 

and wrecked the bone-house. Now blade and hand, 
sword and sword-stroke, will assay the hoard.” 
Beowulf spoke, made a formal boast Beowulf's last boast 
for the last time: “I risked my life 


BEOWULF 169 


2520 


2530 


2540 


170 


giida on geogode; gýt ic wylle, 

frd folces weard, f#hde sécan, 

má&róu fremman, gif mec se man-sceada 
of eord-sele üt geséced!” 

Gegrétte 64 gumena gehwylcne, 

hwate helm-berend hindeman side, 
sw&se gesidas: “Nolde ic sweord beran, 


wepen to wyrme, gif ic wiste hi 


- wióOamaglecean elles meahte 


gylpe wiógripan, swéa ic gio wid Grendle dyde; 2520 
ac ic 6&r headu-fyres hates wene, 
oredes ond attres; fordon ic mē on hafu 
bord ond byrnan. Nelle ic beorges weard 
oferfleon fotes trem, ac unc furóur sceal 
weordan æt wealle, swa unc wyrd getéod 
Metod manna gehwes. Ic eom on móde from, 
pet ic wid pone güó-flogan  gylp ofersitte. 
Gebide gé on beorge, byrnum werede, 
secgas on searwum, hweder sél mege 
efter wal-rése wunde gedygan 
uncer twega. Nis bet eower sid, 2530 
né gemet mannes, nefne min anes 
pet hē wid aglécean eofodo dēle, 
eorlscype efne. Ic mid elne sceall 
gold gegangan, od0e güó nimeó, 
feorh-bealu frécne, fréan eowerne!" 

Aras 0a bi ronde  róf Gretta, 
heard under helme, hioro-sercean ber 
under stan-cleofu, strengo getruwode 
anes mannes; ne bid swylc earges sīð! 


2540 


BEOWULF 


often when I was young. Now I am old, 

but as king of the people I shall pursue this fight 
for the glory of winning, if the evil one will only 
abandon his earth-fort and face me in the open.” 


Then he addressed each dear companion 

one final time, those fighters in their helmets, 
resolute and high-born: “I would rather not 

use a weapon if I knew another way 

to grapple with the dragon and make good my boast 
as I did against Grendel in days gone by. 

But I shall be meeting molten venom 

in the fire he breathes, so I go forth 

in mail-shirt and shield. I won't shift a foot 

when I meet the cave-guard: what occurs on the wall 
between the two of us will turn out as fate, 

overseer of men, decides. I am resolved. 

Iscorn further words against this sky-borne foe. 


“Men at arms, remain here on the barrow, 
safe in your armour, to see which one of us 
is better in the end at bearing wounds 

in a deadly fray. This fight is not yours, 

nor is it up to any man except me 

to measure his strength against the monster 
or to prove his worth. I shall win the gold 
by my courage, or else mortal combat, 
doom of battle, will bear your lord away.” 


Then he drew himself up beside his shield. 
The fabled warrior in his warshirt and helmet 
trusted in his own strength entirely 

and went under the crag. No coward path. 


BEOWULF 


171 


2550 


2560 


2570 


172 


Geseah 6a be wealle, sé de worna fela, 
gum-cystum god, gilda gedigde, 
hilde-hlemma,  ponne hnitan feóan, 
stondan stán-bogan, stream üt ponan 
brecan of beorge; wes bére burnan welm 
heaóo-fyrum hàt; ne meahte horde néah 
unbyrnende é&nige hwile 
déop gedygan for dracan lege. 

Let 64 of bréostum, 64 he gebolgen wes, 
Weder-Géata léod word Ut faran, 
stearc-heort styrmde;  stefn in becOm 
heado-torht hlynnan under harne stan. 
Hete wes onhréred, hord-weard oncniow 
mannes reorde; nas d&r mara fyrst 
fréode to friclan. From &rest cwom 

orud aglécean üt of stane, 

hat hilde-swàt; hrüse dynede. 

Biorn under beorge  bord-rand onswaf 
wid 64m gryre-gieste, Géata dryhten; 

6a wes hring-bogan  heorte gefysed 
sæcce to séceanne. Sweord &r gebréd 
god gtid-cyning, gomele lafe, 

ecgum ungleaw; &ghwaedrum wes 
bealo-hycgendra  broga fram öðrum. 
Stió-mod gestod wid steapne rond 

winia bealdor, óa se wyrm gebeah 

snide tósomne; hē on searwum bad. 
Gewat 6a byrnende gebogen scridan, 

to gescipe scyndan. Scyld wel gebearg 
life ond lice 1&ssan hwile 

má&rum béodne bonne his myne sóhte; 
Ó&r hé by fyrste forman dogore 

wealdan móste, swa him wyrd ne gescraf 


BEOWULF 


2550 


2560 


2570 


Hard by the rock-face that hale veteran, 

a good man who had gone repeatedly 

into combat and danger and come through, 
saw a Stone arch and a gushing stream 

that burst from the barrow, blazing and wafting 
a deadly heat. It would be hard to survive 
unscathed near the hoard, to hold firm 

against the dragon in those flaming depths. 
Then he gave a shout. The lord of the Geats 
unburdened his breast and broke out 

in a storm of anger. Under grey stone 

his voice challenged and resounded clearly. 
Hate was ignited. The hoard-guard recognized 
a human voice, the time was over 

for peace and parleying. Pouring forth 

in a hot battle-fume, the breath of the monster 
burst from the rock. There was a rumble under ground. 
Down there in the barrow, Beowulf the warrior 
lifted his shield: the outlandish thing 

writhed and convulsed and viciously 

turned on the king, whose keen-edged sword, 
an heirloom inherited by ancient right, 

was already in his hand. Roused to a fury, 

each antagonist struck terror in the other. 
Unyielding, the lord of his people loomed 

by his tall shield, sure of his ground, 

while the serpent looped and unleashed itself. 
Swaddled in flames, it came gliding and flexing 
and racing towards its fate. Yet his shield defended 
the renowned leader’s life and limb 

for a shorter time than he meant it to: 

that final day was the first time 

when Beowulf fought and fate denied him 


BEOWULF 


Beowulf fights the 
dragon 


173 


2580 


2590 


2600 


174 


hré6 æt hilde. Hond up abréd 

Géata dryhten, gryre-fahne slóh 
incge-lafe, pt slo ecg gewac, 

brün on bane, bat unswidor 

bonne his diod-cyning  bearfe hefde, 


bysigum gebéded. ba wes beorges weard 


æfter heaóu-swenge on hréoum mode, 
wearp wel-fyre, wide sprungon 
hilde-leoman. | Hreó-sigora ne gealp 
gold-wine Géata;  güó-bill geswac, 
nacod et nide, swa hyt nó sceolde, 
iren &r-god. Ne wes pet ede sid, 

pet se mæra maga Ecgdéowes 
grund-wong bone _ ofgyfan wolde; 
sceolde ofer willan  wic eardian 

elles hwergen, swa sceal &ghwylc mon 
alétan làn-dagas. Nes 0a long to don, 
pet ða aglécean hy eft gemétton. 


Hyrte hyne hord-weard —hreder £0me wéoll — 


niwan stefne; nearo drowode, 
fyre befongen, sé de &r folce weold. 
Nealles him on héape — hand-gesteallan, 
zdelinga bearn ymbe gestodon 
hilde-cystum, ac hy on holt bugon, 
ealdre burgan. Hiora in ánum weoll 
sefa wid sorgum. Sibb fre ne meg 
wiht onwendan bàm ðe wel benceó. 
Wiglaf wes haten,  Wéoxstánes sunu, 
léoflic lind-wiga, léod Scylfinga, 
mig /Elfheres; geseah his mon-dryhten 


BEOWULF 


2580 


2590 


2600 


glory in battle. So the king of the Geats 

raised his hand and struck hard 

at the enamelled scales, but scarcely cut through: 
the blade flashed and slashed yet the blow 

was far less powerful than the hard-pressed king 
had need of at that moment. The mound-keeper 
went into a spasm and spouted deadly flames: 
when he felt the stroke, battle-fire 

billowed and spewed. Beowulf was foiled 

of a glorious victory. The glittering sword, 
infallible before that day, 


failed when he unsheathed it, as it never should have. 


For the son of Ecgtheow, it was no easy thing 
to have to give ground like that and go 
unwillingly to inhabit another home 

in a place beyond; so every man must yield 
the leasehold of his days. 


Before long 
the fierce contenders clashed again. 
The hoard-guard took heart, inhaled and swelled up 
and got a new wind; he who had once ruled 
was furled in fire and had to face the worst. 
No help or backing was to be had then 
from his high-born comrades; that hand-picked troop 
broke ranks and ran for their lives 
to the safety of the wood. But within one heart 
sorrow welled up: in a man of worth 
the claims of kinship cannot be denied. 


His name was Wiglaf, a son of Weohstan's, 
a well-regarded Shylfing warrior 
related to Aelfhere. When he saw his lord 


BEOWULF 


Beowulf 's sword 
fails him 


All but one of 
Beowulf’s band 
withdraw to safety 


Wiglaf stands by his 
lord 


175 


2610 


2620 


2630 


176 


under here-griman hat prowian. 

Gemunde 64 04 äre pé hē him &r forgeaf, 

wic-stede weligne Wgmundinga, 

folc-rihta gehwylc, swā his feeder ahte; 

ne mihte 64 forhabban, hond rond geféng, 

geolwe linde; gomel swyrd getéah, 2610 

pet wes mid eldum Eanmundes laf, 

suna Ohteres. bam æt sæcce weard, 

wreccan wine-léasum, Weohstan bana 

méces ecgum, ond his magum etber 

brün-fagne helm, hringde byrnan, 

eald-sweord etonisc. Pat him Onela forgeaf, 

his gedelinges | güÓ-gewzadu, 

fyrd-searo füslic; no ymbe 64 f&hóe sprzc, 

péah ðe hē his brddor bearn  abredwade. 

He fretwe gehéold fela missera, 

bill ond byrnan, oððæt his byre mihte 2620 

eorlscipe efnan  swà his &r-fzder; 

geaf him 64 mid Geatum  güó-gewzda 

éghwes unrim, 4 hé of ealdre gewat, 

frod on ford-weg. Pa wes forma sió 

geongan cempan, pet hé güde ræs 

mid his fréo-dryhtne fremman sceolde. 

Ne gemealt him se mod-sefa, | ne his m&ges laf 

gewac æt wige. Þæt se wyrm onfand, 

syddan hie togedre gegan hefdon. 

Wiglaf maóelode, word-rihta fela 

segde gesidum —him wes sefa geomor. 2630 
“Ic dat m&l geman, b&r we medu pegun, 

bonne we geheton  üssum hlaforde 


BEOWULF 


tormented by the heat of his scalding helmet, 

he remembered the bountiful gifts bestowed on him, 
how well he lived among the Waegmundings, 

the freehold he inherited from his father before him. 
He could not hold back: one hand brandished 

the yellow-timbered shield, the other drew his sword— 
an ancient blade that was said to have belonged 

to Eanmund, the son of Ohthere, the one 


Weohstan had slain when he was an exile without friends. 


He carried the arms to the victim’s kinfolk, 

the burnished helmet, the webbed chain-mail 

and that relic of the giants. But Onela returned 

the weapons to him, rewarded Weohstan 

with Eanmund’s war-gear. He ignored the blood-feud, 
the fact that Eanmund was his brother’s son. 


Weohstan kept that war-gear for a lifetime, 
the sword and the mail-shirt, until it was the son’s turn 
to follow his father and perform his part. 
Then, in old age, at the end of his days 
among the Weather-Geats, he bequeathed to Wiglaf 
innumerable weapons. 
And now the youth 
was to enter the line of battle with his lord, 
his first time to be tested as a fighter. 
His spirit did not break and the ancestral blade 
would keep its edge, as the dragon discovered 
as soon as they came together in the combat. 


Sad at heart, addressing his companions, 
Wiglaf spoke wise and fluent words: 

“I remember that time when mead was flowing, 
how we pledged loyalty to our lord in the hall, 


BEOWULF 


The deeds of 
Wiglaf's father, 
Weohstan, recalled 


Wiglaf's speech to 
the shirkers 


177 


2640 


2650 


2660 


178 


in bior-sele, de tis Óas béagas geaf, 

pet wē him 64 güó-getawa gyldan woldon, 

gif him pyslicu  bearf gelumpe, 

helmas ond heard sweord. Dé hé üsic on herge gecéas 

tō dyssum siÓ-fate  sylfes willum, 

onmunde üsic mérda, ond me pas madmas geaf, 2640 

bé hé üsic gar-wigend gode tealde, 

hwate helm-berend, péah de hlaford ts 

bis ellen-weorc āna addhte 

to gefremmanne,  folces hyrde, 

foróam hé manna mæst máróa gefremede, 

dé&da dollicra. Ni is sé deg cumen 

pet ire man-dryhten megenes behofaó, 

godra giid-rinca; wutun gongan to, 

helpan hild-fruman, penden hyt sy, 

gled-egesa grim! God wat on mec, 2650 

b&t mé is micle léofre, pat minne Iic-haman 

mid minne gold-gyfan  gled fzómie. 

Ne bynceó mé gerysne, pat wē rondas beren 

eft tó earde, nemne we ror megen 

fane gefyllan, feorh ealgian 

Wedra óéodnes. Ic wat geare, 

pet n&ron eald-gewyrht, pat he ana scyle 

Géata duguóe  gnorn prowian, 

gesigan zt secce; iirum sceal sweord ond helm, 

byrne ond beadu-scrid bam gemane." 2660 
Wod pa burh pone wel-réc, wig-heafolan ber 

fréan on fultum, | fea worda cwzó: 

“Leofa Biowulf, lst eall tela, 

swa Óü on geoguó-feore geara gecw&de, 

pet dU ne al&te be dé lifigendum 

döm gedréosan;_scealt ni d#dum rof, 

æðeling àn-hydig, ealle mzgene 


BEOWULF 


promised our ring-giver we would be worth our price, 
make good the gift of the war-gear, 

those swords and helmets, as and when 

his need required it. He picked us out 

from the army deliberately, honoured us and judged us 
fit for this action, made me these lavish gifts— 

and all because he considered us the best 

of his arms-bearing thanes. And now, although 

he wanted this challenge to be one he'd face 

by himself alone—the shepherd of our land, 

a man unequalled in the quest for glory 

and a name for daring—now the day has come 
when this lord we serve needs sound men 

to give him their support. Let us go to him, 

help our leader through the hot flame 

and dread of the fire. As God is my witness, 

I would rather my body were robed in the same 
burning blaze as my gold-giver’s body 

than go back home bearing arms. 

That is unthinkable, unless we have first 

slain the foe and defended the life 

of the prince of the Weather-Geats. I well know 

the things he has done for us deserve better. 

Should he alone be left exposed 

to fall in battle? We must bond together, 

shield and helmet, mail-shirt and sword.” 

Then he waded the dangerous reek and went 

under arms to his lord, saying only: 

“Go on, dear Beowulf, do everything 

you said you would when you were still young 

and vowed you would never let your name and fame 
be dimmed while you lived. Your deeds are famous, 
so stay resolute, my lord, defend your life now 


BEOWULF 


Wiglaf goes to 
Beowulf’s aid 


179 


2670 


2680 


2690 


180 


feorh ealgian; ic Óe ful-l&stu!” 
Æfter 64am wordum — wyrm yrre cwom, 
atolinwit-gast, dre side, 
fyr-wylmum fah, fionda niosian, 2670 
laóra manna; lig yóum for, 
born bord wid rond; byrne ne meahte 
geongum gar-wigan  géoce gefremman; 
ac se maga geonga under his m&gas scyld 
elne geéode, pa his 4gen wes 
gledum forgrunden. ba gen güó-cyning 
má&róa gemunde, magen-strengo sloh 
hilde-bille, pat hyt on heafolan stöd 
nipe genyded; Negling forbzrst, 
geswàc æt secce  sweord Biowulfes, 
gomol ond grég-mél. Him pet gifede ne wes, 2680 
pet him irenna ecge mihton 
helpan æt hilde; wees sio hond to strong, 
sé de méca gehwane, mine gefr&ge, 
swenge ofersóhte, bonne hé tō szcce ber 
wápen wundum heard; nas him wihte dé sel. 
Pa was béod-sceaóa  priddan side, 
frécne fyr-draca f&hda gemyndig, 
résde on done rofan, pa him rim àageald: 
hat ond heado-grim, heals ealne ymbefeng 
biteran banum; he geblodegod wearó 
sawul-driore; swat yóum wéoll. 2690 
Da ic et pearfe gefregn péod-cyninges 
andlongne eorl ellen c¥dan, 
craft ond cenóu, swa him gecynde wes. 


BEOWULF 


with the whole of your strength. I shall stand by you.” 


After those words, a wildness rose 
in the dragon again and drove it to attack, 
heaving up fire, hunting for enemies, 
the humans it loathed. Flames lapped the shield, 
charred it to the boss, and the body armour 
on the young warrior was useless to him. 
But Wiglaf did well under the wide rim 
Beowulf shared with him once his own had shattered 
in sparks and ashes. 
Inspired again 
by the thought of glory, the war-king threw 
his whole strength behind a sword-stroke 
and connected with the skull. And Naegling snapped. 
Beowulf’s ancient iron-grey sword 
let him down in the fight. It was never his fortune 
to be helped in combat by the cutting edge 
of weapons made of iron. When he wielded a sword, 
no matter how blooded and hard-edged the blade 
his hand was too strong, the stroke he dealt 
(I have heard) would ruin it. He could reap no advantage. 


Then the bane of that people, the fire-breathing dragon, 
was mad to attack for a third time. 

When a chance came, he caught the hero 

in a rush of flame and clamped sharp fangs 

into his neck. Beowulf’s body 

ran wet with his life-blood: it came welling out. 


Next thing, they say, the noble son of Weohstan 


saw the king in danger at his side 
and displayed his inborn bravery and strength. 


BEOWULF 


The dragon attacks 
again 


Another setback 


The dragon's third 
onslaught. He draws 
blood 


Wiglaf gets past the 
flames and strikes 


181 


2700 


2710 


2720 


182 


Ne hedde he pass heafolan, ac sio hand gebarn 
modiges mannes, pér hé his m&ges healp 
bat hé pone nid-gest niodor hwene sloh, 
secg on searum, bat ðæt sweord gedeaf, 
fah ond féted, pet det fýr ongon 
sweürian syððan. ba gen sylf cyning 
gewéold his gewitte, well-seaxe gebr&d, 
biter ond beadu-scearp, pat he on byrnan weg; 
forwrat Wedra helm wyrm on middan. 
Féond gefyldan —ferh ellen wræc— 
ond hi hyne pa bégen  abroten hefdon, 
sib-edelingas. Swylc sceolde secg wesan, 
þegn zt dearfe! — 

bet 6am péodne wes 
sidast sige-hwile sylfes dédum, 
worlde geweorces. Da sio wund ongon, 
pe him se eoró-draca &r geworhte, 
swelan ond swellan; hé pat sona onfand, 
pet him on bréostum _ bealo-nide wéoll 
attor on innan. Da se æðeling giong, 
pet hé br wealle, wis-hycgende, 
geset on sesse; seah on enta geweorc, 
hi 64 stan-bogan  stapulum fæste 
éce eord-reced innan healde. 
Hyne pa mid handa,  heoro-dreorigne, 
péoden márne, þegn ungemete till, 
wine-dryhten his wetere gelafede, 
hilde-szedne, ond his helm onspéon. 

Biowulf mapelode —hé ofer benne sprec, 

wunde wzl-bleate; wisse hé gearwe, 
pet hé deg-hwila gedrogen hefde, 


BEOWULF 


2700 


2710 


2720 


He left the head alone, but his fighting hand 
was burned when he came to his kinsman's aid. 
He lunged at the enemy lower down 

so that his decorated sword sank into its belly 
and the flames grew weaker. 

Once again the king 
gathered his strength and drew a stabbing knife 
he carried on his belt, sharpened for battle. 

He stuck it deep into the dragon's flank. 
Beowulf dealt it a deadly wound. 
They had killed the enemy, courage quelled his life; 
that pair of kinsmen, partners in nobility, 
had destroyed the foe. So every man should act, 
be at hand when needed; but now, for the king, 
this would be the last of his many labours 
and triumphs in the world. 

Then the wound 
dealt by the ground-burner earlier began 
to scald and swell; Beowulf discovered 
deadly poison suppurating inside him, 
surges of nausea, and so, in his wisdom, 
the prince realized his state and struggled 
towards a seat on the rampart. He steadied his gaze 
on those gigantic stones, saw how the earthwork 
was braced with arches built over columns. 
And now that thane unequalled for goodness 
with his own hands washed his lord's wounds, 
swabbed the weary prince with water, 
bathed him clean, unbuckled his helmet. 


Beowulf spoke: in spite of his wounds, 
mortal wounds, he still spoke 
for he well knew his days in the world 


BEOWULF 


Beowulf delivers the 
fatal wound 


Beowulf senses that 
he is near death 


183 


2730 


2740 


2750 


184 


eordan wynne; 64 wes eall sceacen 
dogor-gerimes, déad ungemete néah:— 
“Ni ic suna minum  syllan wolde 
gud-gew&du, þēr mé gifede swa 

&nig yrfe-weard efter wurde, 

lice gelenge. Ic das léode héold 

fifüg wintra; nes se folc-cyning, 
ymbe-sittendra nig dara, 

be mec güó-winum  grétan dorste, 
egesan Qeon. Ic on earde bad 
mél-gesceafta, héold min tela, 

ne sohte searo-nidas, né me swor fela 
ada on unriht. Ic des ealles meg, 
feorh-bennum seoc, geféan habban; 
fordam mé witan ne dearf  Waldend fira 
mordor-bealo maga, ponne min sceaceó 
lif of lice. Ni di lungre geong 

hord scéawian under harne stan, 
Wiglaf léofa, nū se wyrm liged, 
swefed sare wund, since beréafod. 

Bio nt on ofoste, pat ic &r-welan, 
gold-&ht ongite, gearo scéawige 


swegle searo-gimmas, bet ic OV seft mege 


efter maddum-welan min 4l&tan, 

lif ond léodscipe, pone ic longe héold.” 
Da ic snude gefregn sunu Wihstanes 

after word-cwydum wundum dryhtne 

hýran heado-siocum,  hring-net beran, 


brogdne beadu-sercean under beorges hrof. 
Geseah 64 sige-hrédig, bà hé bi sesse géong, 


mago-begn modig | maóóum-sigla fealo, 


BEOWULF 


2730 


2740 


2750 


had been lived out to the end: his allotted time 


was drawing to a close, death was very near. 


“Now is the time when I would have wanted 

to bestow this armour on my own son, 

had it been my fortune to have fathered an heir 
and live on in his flesh. For fifty years 

I ruled this nation. No king 

of any neighbouring clan would dare 

face me with troops, none had the power 

to intimidate me. I took what came, 

cared for and stood by things in my keeping, 
never fomented quarrels, never 

swore to a lie. All this consoles me, 

doomed as I am and sickening for death; 
because of my right ways, the Ruler of mankind 
need never blame me when the breath leaves my body 
for murder of kinsmen. Go now quickly, 

dearest Wiglaf, under the grey stone 

where the dragon is laid out, lost to his treasure; 
hurry to feast your eyes on the hoard. 

Away you go: I want to examine 

that ancient gold, gaze my fill 

on those garnered jewels; my going will be easier 
for having seen the treasure, a less troubled letting-go 
of the life and lordship I have long maintained.” 


And so, I have heard, the son of Weohstan 
quickly obeyed the command of his languishing 
war-weary lord; he went in his chain-mail 

under the rock-piled roof of the barrow, 

exulting in his triumph, and saw beyond the seat 


a treasure-trove of astonishing richness, 


BEOWULF 


He thinks back on 
his life 


He bids Wiglaf to 
inspect the hoard 
and return with a 
portion of the 
treasure 


Wiglaf enters the 
dragon’s barrow 


185 


2760 


2770 


2780 


186 


gold glitinian grunde getenge, 

wundur on wealle, ond pes wyrmes denn, 
ealdes tht-flogan, orcas stondan, 
fyrn-manna fatu, feormend-léase, 
hyrstum behrorene. Per wes helm monig, 
eald ond ómig, earm-béaga fela, 

searwum ges&led. Sinc eade meg, 

gold on grunde, gum-cynnes gehwone 
oferhigian; hyde sé de wylle! 

Swylce he siomian geseah segn eall-gylden 
héah ofer horde, hond-wundra m&st, 
gelocen leodo-creftum; of 6am léoma stod, 
pet he bone grund-wong  ongitan meahte, 
write giondwlitan. Nes des wyrmes b&r 
onsyn &nig, ac hyne ecg fornam. 

Da ic on hléwe gefregn hord réafian, 
eald enta geweorc 4nne mannan, 

him on bearm hladon bunan ond discas 
sylfes dóme; segn éac genom, 

béacna beorhtost. Bill &r gescod 

—ecg wasiren—  eald-hlafordes 

pam óara maóma mund-bora wes 
longe hwile, lig-egesan weg 

hatne for horde, hioro-weallende 
middel-nihtum, odpat hé moróre swealt. 
Ar wes on ofoste,  eft-sides georn, 
fretwum gefyróred; hyne fyrwet brec, 
hwzóer collen-ferd cwicne gemétte 

in 6am wong-stede Wedra beoden 
ellen-siocne,  b&r hē hine &r forlet. 


2760 


2770 


2780 


BEOWULF 


wall-hangings that were a wonder to behold, 
glittering gold spread across the ground, 

the old dawn-scorching serpent's den 

packed with goblets and vessels from the past, 
tarnished and corroding. Rusty helmets 

all eaten away. Armbands everywhere, 
artfully wrought. How easily treasure 

buried in the ground, gold hidden 

however skilfully, can escape from any man! 


And he saw too a standard, entirely of gold, 
hanging high over the hoard, 
a masterpiece of filigree; it glowed with light 
so he could make out the ground at his feet 
and inspect the valuables. Of the dragon there was no 
remaining sign: the sword had despatched him. 
Then, the story goes, a certain man 
plundered the hoard in that immemorial howe, 
filled his arms with flagons and plates, 
anything he wanted; and took the standard also, 
most brilliant of banners. 

Already the blade 
of the old king’s sharp killing-sword 
had done its worst: the one who had for long 
minded the hoard, hovering over gold, 
unleashing fire, surging forth 
midnight after midnight, had been mown down. 


Wiglaf went quickly, keen to get back, 

excited by the treasure. Anxiety weighed 

on his brave heart—he was hoping he would find 
the leader of the Geats alive where he had left him 
helpless, earlier, on the open ground. 


BEOWULF 


He returns with 
treasure 


187 


2790 


2800 


2810 


188 


Hé 64 mid bam màómum mérne pioden, 
dryhten sīnne driorigne fand, 

ealdres et ende; hē hine eft ongon 

weeteres weorpan, oðþæt wordes ord 
bréost-hord purhbrec. ba se beorn gesprec, 
gomel on giohóe:  — gold sceawode— 

“Ic Óara fretwa Fréan ealles Óanc, 
Wuldur-cyninge, wordum secge, 
écum Dryhtne, pe ic her on starie, 
pes de ic moste minum leodum 
&rswylt-dege swylc gestrynan. 

Ni ic on maóma hord mine bebohte 
frode feorh-lege, fremmaó gena 

léoda pearfe! Ne meg ic her leng wesan. 
Hatad heado-mére  hl&w gewyrcean, 
beorhtne efter b&le æt brimes nosan; 

se scel tó gemyndum minum léodum 
heah hlifian on Hrones-nzsse, 

pet hit sé-lidend syddan hatan 
Biowulfes biorh, 064 ðe brentingas 

ofer fléda genipu feorran drifaó." 

Dyde him of healse hring gyldenne 
pioden prist-hydig, pbegne gesealde, 
geongum gar-wigan, gold-fahne helm, 
béah ond byrnan, het hyne brücan well: 
“Pū eart ende-laf  üsses cynnes, 
Wegmundinga; ealle wyrd forspéon 
mīne māgas tō meodsceafte, 
eorlas on elne; ic him æfter sceal.” 

Þæt wæs þām gomelan gingæste word 


BEOWULF 


2790 


2800 


2810 


So he came to the place, carrying the treasure, 
and found his lord bleeding profusely, 

his life at an end; again he began 

to swab his body. The beginnings of an utterance 
broke out from the king’s breast-cage. 

The old lord gazed sadly at the gold. 


“To the everlasting Lord of All, 

to the King of Glory, I give thanks 

that I behold this treasure here in front of me, 
that I have been allowed to leave my people 

so well endowed on the day I die. 

Now that I have bartered my last breath 

to own this fortune, it is up to you 

to look after their needs. I can hold out no longer. 
Order my troop to construct a barrow 

on a headland on the coast, after my pyre has cooled. 
It will loom on the horizon at Hronesness 

and be a reminder among my people— 

so that in coming times crews under sail 

will call it Beowulf’s Barrow, as they steer 

ships across the wide and shrouded waters.” 


Then the king in his great-heartedness unclasped 
the collar of gold from his neck and gave it 

to the young thane, telling him to use 

it and the warshirt and the gilded helmet well. 


“You are the last of us, the only one left 

of the Waegmundings. Fate swept us away, 
sent my whole brave high-born clan 

to their final doom. Now I must follow them.” 
That was the warrior’s last word. 


BEOWULF 


Beowulf gives thanks 
and orders the 
construction of a 
barrow to 
commemorate him 


Beowulf’s last words 


189 


2820 


2830 


2840 


190 


bréost-gehygdum, Zr hē bal cure, 
hate heado-wylmas; him of hwæðre gewat 
sawol sécean  soÓ-fzstra dom. 

Da wes gegongen guman unfródum 
earfodlice, bat hē on eoróan geseah 
pone léofestan lifes æt ende, 
bleate gebéran. Bona swylce leg, 
egeslic eord-draca, ealdre beréafod, 
bealwe geb&ded. Béah-hordum leng 
wyrm woh-bogen  wealdan ne moóste, 
ac hineirenna ecga fornamon, 
hearde, heado-scearde, homera lafe, 
pet se wid-floga wundum stille 
hréas on hrüsan  hord-zrne neah. 
Nalles efter lyfte  lacende hwearf 
middel-nihtum, | maóm-&hta wlonc 
ansyn ywde; ac he eordan gefeoll 
for ózs hild-fruman hond-geweorce. 
Hüru pet on lande lyt manna dah, 
megen-agendra, mine gefr&ge, 
béah de he d&da gehwes  dyrstig ware, 
bat hé wid attor-sceaóan orede geresde, 
oóóe hring-sele hondum styrede, 
gif he weccende weard onfunde 
büon on beorge. Biowulfe wearó 
dryht-maóma d&l déade forgolden; 
hefde zghwzóer ende gefered 
l&nan lifes. 

Nes 64 lang tō don, 


BEOWULF 


2830 


2840 


He had no more to confide. The furious heat 


of the pyre would assail him. His soul fled from his breast 


to its destined place among the steadfast ones. 


It was hard then on the young hero, 

having to watch the one he held so dear 

there on the ground, going through 

his death agony. The dragon from underearth, 
his nightmarish destroyer, lay destroyed as well, 
utterly without life. No longer would his snakefolds 
ply themselves to safeguard hidden gold. 
Hard-edged blades, hammered out 

and keenly filed, had finished him 

so that the sky-roamer lay there rigid, 

brought low beside the treasure-lodge. 


Never again would he glitter and glide 
and show himself off in midnight air, 
exulting in his riches: he fell to earth 
through the battle-strength in Beowulf’s arm. 
There were few, indeed, as far as I have heard, 
big and brave as they may have been, 
few who would have held out if they had had to face 
the outpourings of that poison-breather 
or gone foraging on the ring-hall floor 
and found the deep barrow-dweller 
on guard and awake. 
The treasure had been won, 
bought and paid for by Beowulf’s death. 
Both had reached the end of the road 
through the life they had been lent. 


Before long 


BEOWULF 


The dragon too has 
been destroyed 


191 


2850 


2860 


2870 


192 


pet 64 hild-latan holt ofgéfan, 
tydre tréow-logan, tyne atsomne, 
64 ne dorston &r  dareóum lacan 
on hyra man-dryhtnes | miclan pearfe; 
ac hy scamiende  scyldas bé&ran, 2850 
gūð-gewēdu, bár se gomela læg; 
wlitan on Wilaf. Hē gewērgad sæt, 
f€de-cempa, fréan eaxlum nēah; 
wehte hyne wætre, him wiht ne spēow. 
Ne meahte he on eorðan, öðēah hë tide wel, 
on 6am frum-gāre feorh gehealdan, 
nē Ózs Wealdendes wiht oncirran. 
Wolde dóm Godes dé&dum r&dan 
gumena gehwylcum, swā hē nū gén deó. 

bà wes et dam geongan grim andswaru 
é0-begéte pam ðe čr his elne forléas. 2860 
Wiglaf madelode, Wéohstanes sunu, 
séc sarig-ferd —seah on unléofe—: 
“bet la meg secgan, sé de wyle sõð specan, 
pet se mon-dryhten, sē čow 64 maómas geaf, 
éored-geatwe, be ge b&r on standaó, 
bonne hé on ealu-bence oft gesealde 
heal-sittendum helm ond byrnan, 
péoden his þegnum, | swylce hé prydlicost 
ower feor od6e néah  findan meahte, 
pet hē génunga güó-gewzdu 
wrade forwurpe, 6a hyne wig beget. 2870 
Nealles folc-cyning fyrd-gesteallum 
gylpan porfte; hwedre him God de, 
sigora Waldend, pat he hyne sylfne gewrec, 
ana mid ecge, bà him wees elnes pearf. 


BEOWULF 


the battle-dodgers abandoned the wood, 

the ones who had let down their lord earlier, 

the tail-turners, ten of them together. 

When he needed them most, they had made off. 
Now they were ashamed and came behind shields, 
in their battle-outfits, to where the old man lay. 
They watched Wiglaf, sitting worn out, 

a comrade shoulder to shoulder with his lord, 
trying in vain to bring him round with water. 
Much as he wanted to, there was no way 

he could preserve his lord’s life on earth 

or alter in the least the Almighty’s will. 

What God judged right would rule what happened 
to every man, as it does to this day. 


Then a stern rebuke was bound to come 

from the young warrior to the ones who had been 
cowards. 

Wiglaf, son of Weohstan, spoke 

disdainfully and in disappointment: 

“Anyone ready to admit the truth 

will surely realize that the lord of men 

who showered you with gifts and gave you the armour 

you are standing in—when he would distribute 

helmets and mail-shirts to men on the mead-benches, 

a prince treating his thanes in hall 

to the best he could find, far or near— 

was throwing weapons uselessly away. 

It would be a sad waste when the war broke out. 

Beowulf had little cause to brag 

about his armed guard; yet God who ordains 

who wins or loses allowed him to strike 

with his own blade when bravery was needed. 


BEOWULF 


The battle-dodgers 
come back 


Wiglaf rebukes them 


193 


2880 


2890 


2900 


194 


Ic him lif-wrade, lytyle meahte 

etgifan æt gide, ond ongan swa peah 

ofer min gemet méges helpan. 

Symle wes by s&mra, bonne ic sweorde drep n 
ferhé-genidlan, fyr unswidor 

wéoll of gewitte. Wergendra to lýt 

prong ymbe péoden, a hyne sio brag becwom. 

Ni sceal sinc-bego ond swyrd-gifu, 

eall édel-wyn éGowrum cynne, 

lufen alicgean; lond-rihtes mot 

þēre még-burge monna ghwylc 

1del hweorfan, syddan xdelingas 

feorran gefricgean fleam eowerne, 

dom-leasan dæd. Déad bid sella 

eorla gehwylcum bonne edwit-lif!” 2890 

Heht 64 pat heado-weorc tō hagan biodan 
up ofer ecg-clif, pr pet eorl-weorod 
morgen-longne deg m6d-gidmor sæt, 
bord-hebbende, bēga on wénum, 
ende-dogores ond eft-cymes 
léofes monnes. Lyt swigode 
niwra spella, sé de nes gerad, 
ac hé sddlice segde ofer ealle: 

“Ni is wil-geofa Wedra leoda, 
dryhten Géata déad-bedde fest, 
wunaó wel-reste wyrmes d#dum: 
him on efn liged  ealdor-gewinna 
siex-bennum séoc; sweorde ne meahte 
on jam aglécean nige þinga 
wunde gewyrcean. Wiglaf sited 
ofer Biowulfe, byre Wihstanes, 


2900 


BEOWULF 


There was little I could do to protect his life 

in the heat of the fray, yet I found new strength 

welling up when I went to help him. 

Then my sword connected and the deadly assaults 

of our foe grew weaker, the fire coursed 

less strongly from his head. But when the worst happened 
too few rallied around the prince. 


“So it is goodbye now to all you know and love 
on your home ground, the open-handedness, 
the giving of war-swords. Every one of you 
with freeholds of land, our whole nation, 

will be dispossessed, once princes from beyond 
get tidings of how you turned and fled 

and disgraced yourselves. A warrior will sooner 
die than live a life of shame.” 


Then he ordered the outcome of the fight to be reported 
to those camped on the ridge, that crowd of retainers 
who had sat all morning, sad at heart, 

shield-bearers wondering about 

the man they loved: would this day be his last 

or would he return? He told the truth 

and did not balk, the rider who bore 

news to the cliff-top. He addressed them all: 

“Now the people’s pride and love, 

the lord of the Geats, is laid on his deathbed, 
brought down by the dragon’s attack. 

Beside him lies the bane of his life, 

dead from knife-wounds. There was no way 
Beowulf could manage to get the better 

of the monster with his sword. Wiglaf sits 

at Beowulf’s side, the son of Weohstan, 


BEOWULF 


He predicts that 
enemies will now 
attack the Geats 


A messenger tells the 
people that Beowulf 
is dead 


195 


2910 


2920 


2930 


196 


eorl ofer Öðrum  unlifigendum, 

healdeó hige-m&dum héafod-wearde, 

leofes ond lades. Ni ys leodum wen 26 

orleg-hwile, syððan underne 

Froncum ond Frysum fyll cyninges 

wide weorded. Wes sio wroht scepen 

heard wid Hügas, syddan Higelac cwom 

faran flot-herge on Frésna land, 

b&rhyne Hetware hilde gen gdon, 

elne geéodon mid ofer-megene, 

pet se byrn-wiga būgan sceolde, 

féoll on feóan;  nalles fretwe geaf 

ealdor dugode. Us was à syddan 

Merewioingas  milts ungyfede. 2920 
“Nē ic te Swéo-déode sibbe odde treowe 

wihte ne wéne; ac wes wide cud, 

batte Ongendio  ealdre besnydede 

Haócen Hrepling wid Hrefna-wudu, 

bà for onmédlan é&rest gesohton 

Geata leode Gutd-Scilfingas. 

Sona him se froda  fzeder Ohtheres, 

eald ond eges-full ondslyht ageaf, 

abréot brim-wisan, bryd aheorde, 

gomela i6-méowlan golde berofene, 

Onelan módor ond Ohtheres; aiio 

ond 04 folgode  feorh-geniólan, 

oddzt hi oóeodon  earfoólice 

in Hrefnes-holt hlaford-léase. 

Beset 64 sin-herge  sweorda lafe 

wundum wérge; wean oft gehét 

earmre teohhe ondlonge niht, 


BEOWULF 


the living warrior watching by the dead, 
keeping weary vigil, holding a wake 
for the loved and the loathed. 

Now war is looming 
Over our nation, soon it will be known 
to Franks and Frisians, far and wide, 
that the king is gone. Hostility has been great 
among the Franks since Hygelac sailed forth 
at the head of a war-fleet into Friesland: 
there the Hetware harried and attacked 
and overwhelmed him with great odds. 
The leader in his war-gear was laid low, 
fell amongst followers; that lord did not favour 
his company with spoils. The Merovingian king 
has been an enemy to us ever since. 


“Nor do I expect peace or pact-keeping 

of any sort from the Swedes. Remember: 

at Ravenswood, Ongentheow 

slaughtered Haethcyn, Hrethel's son, 

when the Geat people in their arrogance 

first attacked the fierce Shylfings. 

The return blow was quickly struck 

by Ohthere’s father. Old and terrible, 

he felled the sea-king and saved his own 

aged wife, the mother of Onela 

and of Ohthere, bereft of her gold rings. 

Then he kept hard on the heels of the foe 

and drove them, leaderless, lucky to get away, 
in a desperate rout into Ravenswood. 

His army surrounded the weary remnant 
where they nursed their wounds; all through the night 
he howled threats at those huddled survivors, 


BEOWULF 


He foresees wars 
with the Franks and 
the Frisians 


The Swedes too will 
strike to avenge the 
slaughter of 
Ongentheow 


Ongentheow’s last 
engagement at 
Ravenswood: he 
cornered a Geatish 
force 


197 


2940 


2950 


2960 


2970 


198 


cwæð hē on mergenne  méces ecgum 
getan wolde, sum’ on galg-treowum 
fuglum tó gamene.  Frófor eft gelamp 
sárig-modum somod ér-dege, 
syddan hie Hygelaces horn ond byman, 
gealdor ongéaton, bà se goda com 
léoda dugoóe on last faran. 

“Wes sio swat-swadu Sweona ond Géata, 
wel-r&és weora wide gesyne, 
hū 64 folc mid him f#hde towehton. 
Gewat him 64 se goda mid his gzedelingum, 
frod fela-geomor — festen sécean, 
eorl Ongenpio ufor oncirde; 
hefde Higelàces hilde gefrünen, 
wlonces wig-creft; widres ne truwode, 
pet hë s&-mannum  onsacan mihte, 
heado-lidendum, hord forstandan, 
bearn ond bryde; beah eft ponan 
eald under eoró-weall. ba wes &ht boden 
Sweona leodum, segn Higelaces 
freodo-wong bone forð oferéodon, 
syddan Hrédlingas to hagan brungon. 
bár wearó Ongendiow ecgum sweorda, 
blonden-fexa on bid wrecen, 
pet se béod-cyning dafian sceolde 
Eafores anne dom. Hyne yrringa 
Wulf Wonréding wépne geréhte, 
pet him for swenge swat &drum sprong 
forð under fexe. Nes hē forht swa 6éh, 
gomela Scilfing, ac forgeald hrade 
wyrsan wrixle wel-hlem pone, 
syd6an déod-cyning pyder oncirde. 


BEOWULF 


2940 


2950 


2960 


2970 


promised to axe their bodies open 

when dawn broke, dangle them from gallows 
to feed the birds. But at first light 

when their spirits were lowest, relief arrived. 
They heard the sound of Hygelac’s horn, 

his trumpet calling as he came to find them, 
the hero in pursuit, at hand with troops. 


“The bloody swathe that Swedes and Geats 
cut through each other was everywhere. 

No one could miss their murderous feuding. 
Then the old man made his move, 

pulled back, barred his people in: 
Ongentheow withdrew to higher ground. 
Hygelac’s pride and prowess as a fighter 
were known to the earl; he had no confidence 
that he could hold out against that horde of seamen, 
defend wife and the ones he loved 

from the shock of the attack. He retreated for shelter 
behind the earthwall. Then Hygelac swooped 
on the Swedes at bay, his banners swarmed 
into their refuge, his Geat forces 

drove forward to destroy the camp. 

There in his grey hairs, Ongentheow 

was cornered, ringed around with swords. 
And it came to pass that the king’s fate 

was in Eofor’s hands, and in his alone. 

Wulf, son of Wonred, went for him in anger, 
split him open so that blood came spurting 
from under his hair. The old hero 

still did not flinch, but parried fast, 

hit back with a harder stroke: 

the king turned and took him on. 


BEOWULF 


Hygelac relieved the 
besieged Geats 


Ongentheow 
withdrew 


The Swedish king 
fought for his life. 
He survived a blow 
from Wulf, hit back, 
but was killed by 
Wulf's brother, Eofor 


199 


2980 


2990 


3000 


200 


Ne meahte se snella sunu Wonredes 

ealdum ceorle  ondslyht giofan, 

ac hé him on heafde helm &r gescer, 

bat hē blode fah btigan sceolde, 

feoll on foldan; næs hé fige pA git, 

ac hé hyne gewyrpte, péah de him wund hrine. 
Let se hearda Higelaces þegn 

bradne méce, 4 his brddor leg, 

eald-sweord eotonisc, entiscne helm 

brecan ofer bord-weal; 64 gebéah cyning, 
folces hyrde, wes in feorh dropen. 2980 
Da w&ron monige, be his m&g wridon, 

ricone 4rérdon, 64 him gerymed wearó, 

bat hie wel-stowe wealdan moston. 

Penden réafode  rinc dderne, 

nam on Ongendio iren-byrnan, 

heard swyrd hilted ond his helm somod; 

hares hyrste Higelace beer. 

He 6am fretwum feng ond him fegre gehét 
léana mid léodum, ond gel&ste swa; 

geald bone gtid-rés Géata dryhten, 

Hrédles eafora, pba he to ham becom, 2990 
Iofore ond Wulfe mid ofer-maómum; 

sealde hiora gehwaórum hund püsenda 


landes ond locenra béaga —ne dorfte him 6a lean 
oówitan 

mon on middan-gearde— syddan hie 64 má&róa 
geslogon; 


ond 64 Iofore forgeaf angan dohtor, 
hàm-weoróunge, hyldo tō wedde. 

“Pet ys sio fæhðo ond se feondscipe, 
wel-nid wera, ðæs ðe ic wen hafo, 


3000 


BEOWULF 


Then Wonred’s son, the brave Wulf, 

could land no blow against the aged lord. 
Ongentheow divided his helmet 

so that he buckled and bowed his bloodied head 
and dropped to the ground. But his doom held off. 
Though he was cut deep, he recovered again. 


“With his brother down, the undaunted Eofor, 
Hygelac’s thane, hefted his sword 

and smashed murderously at the massive helmet 
past the lifted shield. And the king collapsed, 
The shepherd of people was sheared of life. 


“Many then hurried to help Wulf, 

bandaged and lifted him, now that they were left 
masters of the blood-soaked battleground. 

One warrior stripped the other, 

looted Ongentheow’s iron mail-coat, 

his hard sword-hilt, his helmet too, 

and carried the graith to King Hygelac; 

he accepted the prize, promised fairly 

that reward would come, and kept his word. 

For their bravery in action, when they arrived home 
Eofor and Wulf were overloaded 

by Hrethel’s son, Hygelac the Geat, 

with gifts of land and linked rings 

that were worth a fortune. They had won glory, 
so there was no gainsaying his generosity. 

And he gave Eofor his only daughter 

to bide at home with him, an honour and a bond. 


“So this bad blood between us and the Swedes, 
this vicious feud, I am convinced, 


BEOWULF 


The victorious Geats 
returned home 


201 


3010 


3020 


3030 


202 


bé iis sécead tō Swéona léoda, 
syddan hie gefricgeaó fréan üserne 
ealdor-leasne, pone de &r gehéold 
wid hettendum hord ond rice 
efter heleda hryre, hwate Scildingas, 
folc-réd fremede oððe furóur gen 
eorlscipe efnde. 

Nü is ofost betost, 
pet wë béod-cyning pér scéawian 
ond pone gebringan, pe iis béagas geaf, 
on àd-fere. Ne scel anes hwet 
meltan mid bam modigan, ac p&r is madma hord, 
gold unrime, grimme gecéapod; 
ond nū æt sidestan sylfes feore 
béagas gebohte: 4 sceall brond fretan, 
&lad peccean, nalles eorl wegan 
maddum to gemyndum, në mzegó scyne 
habban on healse  hring-weoróunge, 
ac sceal geómor-moód, golde beréafod, 
oft, nalles ne,  elland tredan, 
nū se here-wisa  hleahtor alegde, 
gamen ond gléo-dream. Fordon sceall gar wesan 
monig morgen-ceald mundum bewunden, 
hafen on handa,  nalles hearpan sweg 
wigend weccean, ac se wonna hrefn 
fus ofer fægum fela reordian, 
earne secgan, hū him æt te spéow, 
penden hë wið wulf wæl rēafode.” 

Swā se secg hwata secggende wæs 

lāðra spella; hē ne léag fela 
wyrda nē worda. Weorod eall ārās, 


BEOWULF 


3030 


is bound to revive; they will cross our borders 
and attack in force when they find out 
that Beowulf is dead. In days gone by 
when our warriors fell and we were undefended 
he kept our coffers and our kingdom safe. 
He worked for the people, but as well as that 
he behaved like a hero. 
We must hurry now 
to take a last look at the king 
and launch him, lord and lavisher of rings, 
on the funeral road. His royal pyre 
will melt no small amount of gold: 
heaped there in a hoard, it was bought at heavy cost, 
and that pile of rings he paid for at the end 
with his own life will go up with the flame, 
be furled in fire: treasure no follower 
will wear in his memory, nor lovely woman 
link and attach as a torque around her neck— 
but often, repeatedly, in the path of exile 
they shall walk bereft, bowed under woe, 
now that their leader’s laugh is silenced, 
high spirits quenched. Many a spear 
dawn-cold to the touch will be taken down 
and waved on high; the swept harp 
won't waken warriors, but the raven winging 
darkly over the doomed will have news, 
tidings for the eagle of how he hoked and ate, 
how the wolf and he made short work of the dead." 


Such was the drift of the dire report 
that gallant man delivered. He got little wrong 
in what he told and predicted. 

The whole troop 


BEONWULF 


The messenger 
predicts that the 
Swedes will soon 
retaliate 


With Beowulf gone, 
a tragic future 
awaits 


203 


3040 


3050 


3060 


204 


eodon unblide under Earna-nzs, 
wollen-tedre, wundur scéawian. 

Fundon 64 on sande = sawul-leasne 

hlim-bed healdan, pone pe him hringas geaf 
rran m&lum; bà wees ende-deg 

godum gegongen, þæt se giid-cyning, 
Wedra beoden, wundor-déade swealt. 

Ær hi b&r gesegan syllicran wiht, 

wyrm on wonge  wiÓer-rzhtes pr, 

laóne licgean: wees se leg-draca, 

grimlic gryre-fah, gledum beswiled. 

Se wes fiftiges fot-gemearces 

lang on legere; lyft-wynne héold 

nihtes hwilum, nyder eft gewat 

dennes niosian; wes 0a deaóe fest, 

hefde eord-scrafa ende genyttod. 

Him big stodan bunan ond orcas, 

discas lagon ond dyre swyrd, 

omige, burhetone, swa hie wid eordan fedm 
büsend wintra p&r eardodon. 

bonne wes pat yrfe éacen-creftig, 
it-monna gold, galdre bewunden, 

pet dam hring-sele hrinan ne moste 
gumena £nig, nefne God sylfa, 

sigora SoÓ-cyning, sealde bam de hë wolde 
—hé is manna gehyld— hord openian, 


efne swa hwylcum manna, swa him gemet ðūhte. 


bà wes gesyne, pet se sid ne dah 
pam 6e unrihte inne gehydde 
wréte under wealle; weard Ær ofsloh 
feara sumne; 4 sio f#hd geweard 


BEOWULF 


3040 


3050 


3060 


rose in tears, then took their way 

to the uncanny scene under Earnaness. 

There, on the sand, where his soul had left him, 
they found him at rest, their ring-giver 

from days gone by. The great man 

had breathed his last. Beowulf the king 

had indeed met with a marvellous death. 


But what they saw first was far stranger: 

the serpent on the ground, gruesome and vile, 
lying facing him. The fire-dragon 

was scaresomely burnt, scorched all colours. 
From head to tail, his entire length 

was fifty feet. He had shimmered forth 

on the night air once, then winged back 

down to his den; but death owned him now, 

he would never enter his earth-gallery again. 
Beside him stood pitchers and piled-up dishes, 
silent flagons, precious swords 

eaten through with rust, ranged as they had been 
while they waited their thousand winters under ground. 
That huge cache, gold inherited 

from an ancient race, was under a spell— 

which meant no one was ever permitted 

to enter the ring-hall unless God Himself, 
mankind’s Keeper, True King of Triumphs, 
allowed some person pleasing to Him— 

and in His eyes worthy—to open the hoard. 


What came about brought to nothing 

the hopes of the one who had wrongly hidden 

riches under the rock-face. First the dragon slew 

that man among men, who in turn made fierce amends 


BEOWULF 


The Geats find the 
two bodies 


205 


3070 


3080 


3090 


206 


gewrecen wradlice. Wundur hwar bonne 
eorl ellen-rof ende gefére 

lif-gesceafta, bonne leng ne meg 

mon mid his magum medu-seld būan. 
Swa wes Biowulfe, ba hé biorges weard 
sohte, searo-nidas; seofa ne cide 


purh hweet his worulde-gedal weordan sceolde; 


swa hit oð domes deg diope benemdon 
péodnas mére, pa ðæt p&r dydon, 
pet se secg w&re synnum scildig, 
hergum geheaderod, hell-bendum fest, 
wommum gewitnad, sé done wong strude; 
nes hé gold-hwete gearwor hefde 
ügendes est ær gescéawod. 

Wiglaf madelode, Wihstanes sunu: 
“Oft sceall eorl monig Anes willan 
wrá&c adréogan, swa üs geworden is. 
Ne meahton we geléran lēofne péoden. 
rices hyrde  r&d &nigne, 
pet hé ne grette gold-weard pone, 
léte hynelicgean þēr hé longe wes, 
wicum wunian oð woruld-ende; 
héold on héah-gesceap. Hord ys gesceawod, 
grimme gegongen; wes pet gifede tō swid. 
bé done béod-cyning pyder ontyhte. 
Ic wes b&r inne ond pet eall geondseh, 
recedes geatwa, pba mē gerymed wes, 
nealles sw&slice sid alyfed 
inn under eord-weall. Ic on ofoste gefeng 
micle mid mundum megen-byrdenne 
hord-gestréona, hider üt ætbær 
cyninge minum: cwico wes pa gēna, 


BEOWULF 


3070 


3080 


3090 


and settled the feud. Famous for his deeds 

a warrior may be, but it remains a mystery 

where his life will end, when he may no longer 
dwell in the mead-hall among his own. 

So it was with Beowulf, when he faced the cruelty 


and cunning of the mound-guard. He himself was ignorant 


of how his departure from the world would happen. 
The high-born chiefs who had buried the treasure 
declared it until doomsday so accursed 

that whoever robbed it would be guilty of wrong 
and grimly punished for their transgression, 

hasped in hell-bonds in heathen shrines. 

Yet Beowulf's gaze at the gold treasure 

when he first saw it had not been selfish. 


Wiglaf, son of Weohstan, spoke: 

“Often when one man follows his own will 

many are hurt. This happened to us. 

Nothing we advised could ever convince 

the prince we loved, our land's guardian, 

not to vex the custodian of the gold, 

let him lie where he was long accustomed, 

lurk there under earth until the end of the world. 
He held to his high destiny. The hoard is laid bare, 
but at a grave cost; it was too cruel a fate 

that forced the king to that encounter. 

I have been inside and seen everything 

amassed in the vault. I managed to enter 

although no great welcome awaited me 

under the earthwall. I quickly gathered up 

a huge pile of the priceless treasures 

handpicked from the hoard and carried them here 
where the king could see them. He was still himself, 


BEOWULF 


Wiglaf ponders 
Beowulf 's fate 


207 


3110 


3120 


208 


wis ond gewittig. Worn eall gesprec 
gomol on gehdo ond Eowic gretan het, 
bed pet gé geworhton efter wines dédum 
in b#l-stede beorh pone héan, 

micelne ond m&rne, swa hē manna wes 
wigend weord-fullost wide geond eoróan, 
penden he burh-welan  brücan moste. 
Uton nū efstan  oóre side 

séon ond sécean  searo-gimma geprec, 
wundur under wealle; ic ēow wisige, 

pet gé genoge néon scéawiad 

béagas ond brad gold. Sie sto b&r gearo, 
&dre geefned, bonne we üt cymen, 

ond bonne geferian fréan tiserne, 

leofne mannan, þēr hé longe sceal 

on ózs Waldendes wére gepolian.” 

Het 6a gebeodan byre Wihstanes, 
hele hilde-dior, haleóa monegum, 
bold-agendra, pet hie b#l-wudu 
feorran feredon, folc-agende, 
godum togenes: “Nii sceal gléd fretan, 

— weaxan wonna lēg— wigena strengel, 
pone ðe oft gebad — 1sern-scure, 

bonne str&la storm | strengum geb&ded 
Scóc ofer scild-weall, sceft nytte héold, 
feder-gearwum füs, flane fulleode." 

Hüru se snotra sunu Wihstanes 
acigde of coróre  cyniges begnas, 
syfone ztsomne, 4 sélestan, 
eode eahta sum under inwit-hrof 


BEOWULF 


3110 


3120 


alive, aware, and in spite of his weakness 

he had many requests. He wanted me to greet you 
and order the building of a barrow that would crown 
the site of his pyre, serve as his memorial, 

in a commanding position, since of all men 

to have lived and thrived and lorded it on earth 

his worth and due as a warrior were the greatest. 
Now let us again go quickly 

and feast our eyes on that amazing fortune 

heaped under the wall. I will show the way 

and take you close to those coffers packed with rings 
and bars of gold. Let a bier be made 

and got ready quickly when we come out 

and then let us bring the body of our lord, 

the man we loved, to where he will lodge 

for a long time in the care of the Almighty.” 


Then Weohstan's son, stalwart to the end, 
had orders given to owners of dwellings, 
many people of importance in the land, 
to fetch wood from far and wide 
for the good man’s pyre. 

“Now shall flame consume 
our leader in battle, the blaze darken 
round him who stood his ground in the steel-hail, 
when the arrow-storm shot from bowstrings 
pelted the shield-wall. The shaft hit home. 
Feather-fledged, it finned the barb in flight.” 


Next the wise son of Weohstan 

called from among the king’s thanes 

a group of seven: he selected the best 

and entered with them, the eighth of their number, 


BEOWULF 


He reports Beowulf's 
last wishes 


Wiglaf gives orders 
for the building of a 
funeral pyre 


He goes with seven 
thanes to remove the 
treasure from the 
hoard 


209 


3130 


3140 


3150 


210 


hilde-rinca; sum on handa ber 
&led-leoman, sé de on orde géong. 
Nes 64 on hlytme, hwā pat hord strude, 
syd6an orwearde, &nigne dal, 
secgas geségon on sele wunian, 
l&nelicgan; lýt &nig mearn, 
pet hi ofostlice üt geferedon 
dyre màómas; . dracan ec scufun, 
wyrm ofer weall-clif, leton weg niman, 
flod faedmian frætwa hyrde. 
Pa wes wunden gold on wan hladen, 
&ghwes unrim, æpþelingc boren, 
har hilde-rinc tō Hrones-nzssse. 

Him 04 gegiredan Géata léode 
ad on eoróan unwaclicne, 
helmum behongen, hilde-bordum, 
beorhtum byrnum, swā hē bena wes; 
alegdon 04 tomiddes | m&rne béoden 
heled hiofende, hlaford léofne. 
Ongunnon bà on beorge  b&l-fyra mist 
wigend weccan: wudu-réc astah 
sweart ofer swiodole, swogende leg, 
woópe bewunden -—~wind-blond gelaeg — 
oðþæt he 64 bàn-hüs  gebrocen hefde, 
hat on hredre. Higum unrote 
mod-ceare méndon, mon-dryhtnes cwealm; 
swylce giomor-gyd Géatisc méowle 
PEE bunden-heorde 
song sorg-cearig. Sæde geneahhe, 
bat hio hyre here-geongas hearde ondrede 
wel-fylla worn, werudes egesan, 
hyndo ond haft-nyd. Heofon réce swealg. 


BEOWULF 


3130 


3140 


3150 


under the God-cursed roof; one raised 

a lighted torch and led the way. 

No lots were cast for who should loot the hoard 
for it was obvious to them that every bit of it 
lay unprotected within the vault, 

there for the taking. It was no trouble 

to hurry to work and haul out 

the priceless store. They pitched the dragon 
over the clifftop, let tide’s flow 

and backwash take the treasure-minder. 

Then coiled gold was loaded on a cart 

in great abundance, and the grey-haired leader, 
the prince on his bier, borne to Hronesness. 


The Geat people built a pyre for Beowulf, 

stacked and decked it until it stood four-square, 
hung with helmets, heavy war-shields 

and shining armour, just as he had ordered. 

Then his warriors laid him in the middle of it, 
mourning a lord far-famed and beloved. 

On a height they kindled the hugest of all 

funeral fires; fumes of woodsmoke 

billowed darkly up, the blaze roared 

and drowned out their weeping, wind died down 
and flames wrought havoc in the hot bone-house, 
burning it to the core. They were disconsolate 
and wailed aloud for their lord’s decease. 

A Geat woman too sang out in grief; 

with hair bound up, she unburdened herself 

of her worst fears, a wild litany 

of nightmare and lament: her nation invaded, 
enemies on the rampage, bodies in piles, 


slavery and abasement. Heaven swallowed the smoke. 


BEOWULF 


Beowulf's funeral 


A Geat woman's 
dread 


211 


3160 


3170 


3180 


212 


Geworhton 64 Wedra léode 

hléo on hée, sé wes heah ond brad, 
wég-lidendum wide gesyne, 

ond betimbredon on tyn dagum 
beadu-rofes becn; bronda lafe 

wealle beworhton, swā hyt weorólicost 
fore-snotre men  findan mihton. 

Hi on beorg dydon beg ond siglu, 

eall swylce hyrsta, swylce on horde &r 
nió-hédige men  genumen hefdon; 
forleton eorla gestreon eordan healdan, 
gold on greote, pér hit nū gén lifað 
eldum swa unnyt, swa hit ror wes. 
ba ymbe hlé&w riodan  hilde-deore, 
&belinga bearn, ealra twelfe, 

woldon ceare cwidan, kyning ménan, 
word-gyd wrecan ond ymb wer sprecan: 
eahtodan eorlscipe ond his elle-weorc; 
duguóum demdon, swa hit gedéfe bid 
pet mon his wine-dryhten wordum herge, 
ferhóum freoge, bonne hē ford scile 
oflic-haman l&ded weoróan. 

Swa begnornodon Géata léode 
hlafordes hryre, heord-genéatas; 
cwedon pet hé were | wyruld-cyninga, 
manna mildust ond mon-dwérust, 
léodum lidost ond lof-geornost. 


BEOWULF 


3160 


3170 


3180 


Then the Geat people began to construct 

a mound on a headland, high and imposing, 

a marker that sailors could see from far away, 

and in ten days they had done the work. 

It was their hero’s memorial; what remained from the fire 

they housed inside it, behind a wall 

as worthy of him as their workmanship could make it. 

And they buried torques in the barrow, and jewels 

and a trove of such things as trespassing men 

had once dared to drag from the hoard. 

They let the ground keep that ancestral treasure, 

gold under gravel, gone to earth, 

as useless to men now as it ever was. 

Then twelve warriors rode around the tomb, 

chieftain’s sons, champions in battle, 

all of them distraught, chanting in dirges, 

mourning his loss as a man and a king. 

They extolled his heroic nature and exploits 

and gave thanks for his greatness; which was the proper 
thing, 

for a man should praise a prince whom he holds dear 

and cherish his memory when that moment comes 

when he has to be convoyed from his bodily home. 

So the Geat people, his hearth companions, 

sorrowed for the lord who had been laid low. 

They said that of all the kings upon the earth 

he was the man most gracious and fair-minded, 

kindest to his people and keenest to win fame. 


BEOWULF 


Beowulf's barrow 


His people lament 


213 


Family Trees 


Acknowledgements 


Family Trees 


Family trees of the Danish, Swedish, and Geatish dynasties. 
Names given here are the ones used in this translation. 


THE DANES or THE SHIELDINGS 


SHIELD SHEAFSON 


| 





Beow 
Halfdane 
Heorogar HROTHGAR Halga daughter 
m. m. 
Wealhtheow Onela the 
Swede 
Heoroweard Hrethric Hrothmund Freawaru  Hrothulf 
m. 
Ingeld the 
Heathobard 
THE GEATS 
Hrethel 
Herebeald — Haethcyn HYGELAC daughter 
m. m. 
Hygd Ecgtheow 
daughter Heardred BEOWULF 
m. 
Eofor 
THE SWEDES 
Ongentheow 
Ohthere Onela 
nm. 
Eanmund Eadgils daughter 


of Halfdane 


Acknowledgements 


The proposal that I should translate Beowulf came in the early 1980s 
from the editors of The Norton Anthology of English Literature, so my first 
thanks go to M. H. Abrams and Jon Stallworthy, who encouraged the 
late John Benedict to commission some preliminary passages. Then, 
when I got going in earnest four years ago, Norton appointed Professor 
Alfred David to keep a learned eye on what I was making of the origi- 
nal, and without his annotations on the first draft and his many queries 
and suggested alternatives as the manuscript advanced towards com- 
pletion, this translation would have been a weaker and a wobblier thing. 
Al’s responses were informed by scholarship and by a lifetime’s experi- 
ence of teaching the poem, so they were invaluable. Nevertheless, I was 
often reluctant to follow his advice and persisted many times in what 
we both knew were erroneous ways, so he is not to be held responsible 
for any failures here in the construing of the original or for the different 
directions in which it is occasionally skewed. 

I am also grateful to W. W. Norton & Co. for allowing the translation 
to be published by Faber and Faber in London and Farrar, Straus and 
Giroux in New York. 

At Faber’s, I benefited greatly from Christopher Reid’s editorial pencil 
on the first draft and Paul Keegan’s on the second. I also had important 
encouragement and instruction in the latter stages of the work from col- 
leagues at Harvard, who now include by happy coincidence the present 
Associate General Editor of The Norton Anthology, Professor Stephen 
Greenblatt. I remember with special pleasure a medievalists’ seminar 
where I finally recanted on the use of the word “gilly” in the presence of 
Professors Larry Benson, Dan Donoghue, Joseph Harris, and Derek 
Pearsall. Professor John R. Niles happened to attend that seminar and I 


was lucky to enjoy another, too brief discussion with him in Berkeley, 
worrying about word choices and wondering about the prejudice in 
favour of Anglo-Saxon over Latinate diction in translations of the poem. 

Helen Vendler’s reading helped, as ever, in many points of detail, and 
I received other particular and important comments from Professors 
Mary Clayton and Peter Sacks. 

Extracts from the first hundred lines of the translation appeared in The 
Haw Lantern (1987) and Causley at 70 (1987). Excerpts from the more re- 
cent work were published in Agni, The Sunday Times, The Threepenny Re- 
view, The Times Literary Supplement; also in A Parcel of Poems: For Ted 
Hughes on His Sixty-fifth Birthday and The Literary Man, Essays Presented to 
Donald W. Hannah. Lines 88-98 were printed in January 1999 by Bow & 
Arrow Press as a tribute to Professor William Alfred, himself a translator 
of the poem and, while he lived, one of the great teachers of it. Bits of the 
introduction first appeared in The Sunday Tímes and in an article entitled 
"Further Language" (Studies in the Literary Imagination, vol. XXX, no. 2). 
The epigraph to the introduction is from my poem “The Settle Bed" (See- 
ing Things, 1991). The broken lines on p. 151 indicate lacunae in the orig- 


inal text. 


S.H. 


￼