Hi Joseph, hey Philip. How are you? Good. How are you? I'm doing well. Welcome to "Meaning of Life" dot TV. Thanks for having me on.

Oh yes, let me introduce us. I am Philip Menchaca and you are Joseph Baker, associate professor in the Department of Sociology at East Tennessee State University, and you are also a senior research associate for the Association of Religion Data Archives. You're the author of "Paranormal America" and the co-author of the book we're going to discuss today, which is right here: "American Secularism."

And as listeners may gather, we are going to be discussing secularism in America and some of its links to politics and what it means to be secular, and some of the trends in secularism in the United States over the past decade or so.discourages the idea of a national religion and emphasizes the importance of separating church and state. So while Christianity may hold significant cultural and political influence in the United States, it cannot be accurately described as a Christian nation.2:07: Tries to say that the U.S. is a Christian nation is almost like a political claim. The [inaudible] is actually really influential. Now, this is not in the book we're talking about, but I've done some research showing that the strongest religious 2:19: predictor of voting for Donald Trump in the most recent presidential election was Christian nationalism. So, like, how people thought about a range of things about whether religion should be in the public sphere or whether explicitly 2:30: saying the U.S. is a Christian nation. So, the Christian nationalism claim is influential, and it's important to 2:37: understand it, but historically, it's not true in the sense of establishment, and you know, practically, in terms of numbers 2:44: the religion, the U.S. has always been a very diverse nation. And even now, a lot 2:50: of times when people talk about the U.S. as a Christian nation, they reference sort of this mythical past. But 2:56: historians who study, you know, the religion of the U.S. and colonial times will say it wasn't actually that pious 3:01: and either, and it was pretty diverse. And there were different types of religions going on. So, it's more mythology thanAnd, either, and it was pretty diverse, and there were different types of religions going on, and so it's more mythology than fact in terms of history but it's an influential myth as well, I would say interesting. So, I wasn't planning on getting into this, but since you bring up Donald Trump, a question I'm sure you avoid. That's an interesting statistic. Did you happen to, how did you gather that? Was it a survey data you were looking at? Yeah, it's a national survey of American adults, and so we have really good measures of religion. So, at the same time, we're assessing Christian nationalism, we're also looking at religious affiliation, which specific religion you're affiliated with, how much you practice, so how much you attend religious services, how much you pray, biblical literalism, which is kind of a standard measure in the social religion and views of the Bible, and incorporating all those things, as well as controlling for political identity and associated demographics. Christian nationalism is.4:05 - The most important religious predictor, the most important predictors overall, of voting for Trump or party ID which is not surprising, then a measure of what's basically xenophobia, a fear of immigrants, and then Christian nationalism is a close third. That paper's under review right now, so we're probably out in the next year or so. But the Christian nationalism thing is a very influential idea politically and it's not going away. I'd say that just because history itself doesn't support the idea doesn't mean that people don't believe it and act on it.

4:36 - Yeah, this actually goes to something that you mentioned I think towards the end of American Secularism when I believe you talked about the case in Ireland where during the Troubles.

4:59 - And the link between religion and nationalism, can you explain a little bit about that, and then we can go into why I'm thinking that this connection sure.

Well, we used it as a comparison to say...I'm thinking that this connection holds up well. We used it as a comparison to say that people in Western Europe hold up the region as more secular, and Ireland and Northern Ireland have long been something of an exception to the levels of secularity in Europe. People point to the political conflict, and the salience of religion in that conflict, as part of the reason. The joke is that you can be an atheist, but you have to be a Catholic or Protestant atheist - you still have to pick sides in the political conflict. We used this to try to talk about how, for at least the period from the 1950s until really the 90s, the external threat to the United States was perceived to be communism and godless communism at that. Secularity was linked to communism, and there was this external enemy that was associated with secularity. During this time, secularity among the populace was low if you look at opinion surveys and things like that - people had very low levels of people saying they were...6:11 Either they have no religion or they're atheist, etc. As that perceived threat began to wane, and it switched to 6:18 other external threats like Islam, things like that, the level of people claiming 6:26 secularity, the population rose. So part of the argument there was that part of what it might have been keeping 6:31 secularity down was this external threat, and it's linked to secularity rhetoric and politics. And you can look 6:37 at explicitly, if you look at like McCarthyism and things like that, where there's very serious consequences for 6:43 being secular. And then you know, as you move toward the end of that era in the 70s, 80s, the price or the cost might 6:49 be less, but there's still a strong stigma associated with it. But as that wanes, it opens up more space for people 6:55 to claim secularity. So we were making the comparison to Ireland to say that you've always got to look at political 7:01 conflict and how it's linked to religious identity to try to get some sense of how things will fall out. Yeah, so to bring this back to that Trump survey, do you think that what might be happening there is there isout - 
yeah so to bring this back to that Trump survey, do you think that what might be happening there is there is 7:16 this perception of external threats that's driving that was driving7:21 Christian nationalism support for Trump?

speaker 2 - 
yeah certainly, I mean Christian 7:26 nationalism has strong links to other types of ideologies. So, for instance, I7:32 talked about the xenophobia ideology. It's strongly related to Christian nationalism. Now, they're not the same 7:37 thing, but it's like a Venn diagram. There's some overlap, but there's some distinction. So, you can 7:43 be one without the other, but many people are both. And the Christian nationalism idea, if you look at it historically 7:50 going through all the 20th century, usually, it's claimed as a way to exclude 7:56 people who are seen as racially or ethnically other. So, like, you know, the rise of the Klan in the 1920s to the 8:03 1940s, that you're sort of latching on to this idea of Christian nationalism, and to them, that meant kicking out the 8:098:09 Catholics, which is kind of ironic given that it's sort of the original Christian Church, right? But there, it's like this 8:17 idea has a link to sort of kicking out the immigrants. And so there's a Christian nationalism and sort of 8:24 ethnocentrism and xenophobia are all sort of interwoven. So I think there's 8:29 definitely an element of that to it. But at the same time, there are a lot of people who would consider themselves evangelical. And if you ask them 8:37 questions explicitly about racial and ethnic animus or dislike of certain groups, they wouldn't come out as being 8:43 overtly racist. But at the same time, they would come out as being high on the Christian nationalism scale. So it almost 8:50 works as a way to activate people's latent racial or ethnic fears without 8:57 explicitly saying, hey, be a racist. And so it's almost like it's not quite a dog 9:03 whistle, but it's a little more of like an indirect play. And it's very effective. 9:08 And some politicians use it better than others. And we argue that this is how Trump secured a large portion of theand some politicians use it better than others, and we argue that this is how Trump secured a large portion of the religious vote. Because before the election, people were really saying, "Well, you know, he's this, you know, thrice-married New Yorker, you know, he doesn't seem to care about personal morality. Will religious people vote for him?" Blah, blah, blah. But when you actually got to the polls, they voted for him at the same rates they voted for Mitt Romney. It was very high, especially among the Mormon. But so, there didn't seem to be any slack off in the religious vote. And we argued that largely what he did is he activated the Christian nationalism strain of this, which is sort of the motivating factor. 
Okay, well, that's very interesting. We'll look forward to that paper. Takes a while, but it comes out sooner than later.
Yeah - kinda, I guess, back up a little bit. What Trump did?
Yeah, well, that's totally fine. It's what we do. What do people mean when they say that they're secular? Well, people have different meanings.10:10 - "different things and so we include as sort of in this large umbrella so this idea of non religion as an umbrella category we include in that people who would say explicitly I'm an atheist. I don't believe in God. People who would say explicitly I'm an agnostic, or you know, I don't know if there's a God and I don't know if you can find out, kind of like the sort of the identity version and the belief version. And then we also include people who say if we say what's your religion and that's that no no religion but then if you ask a theism question they say yes, they say some form of theism. So we call those people non-affiliated believers. So we include all of them in this sort of the secular category because the last group is explicitly saying I have no religion and that's important. But it's also important to realize that that category sort of straddles the line between religion and secularity, you're kind of half-and-half out, right? So you're organized religion you're out, but on the supernaturalism you're still accepting parts of what will be."

No corrections needed for timestamps.But on the topic of supernaturalism, you're still accepting parts of what will be considered traditional religious views. If you imagine that as a continuum, you could have your firm atheist on one end, which is sort of fully secular or something to that effect. Then, you could have non-affiliated belief as the in-between category before you move back over to religion. So, what we're arguing is that we should study all three of those groups fairly intently and in depth, and that they all warrant their own study. Some people try to slice out different parts inside of those, so they'll say, "Let's look at the spiritual but not religious." And those people tend to be concentrated in the non-affiliated believer group. I'm all for all of that stuff, but we basically include people if they said, "I have no religion" on an affiliation question or if they said, "I'm either an atheist or an agnostic." And it's important to note that you can be affiliated as a non-theist, so that's quite possible.12:09 Right, I could be a Jewish atheist or so, right, and that would be what some people sometimes call culturally religious. 12:18 Right, and I think, I do think it actually, correct me if I'm wrong, but I think there tend to be very high levels of that in 12:25 Judaism, right? Correct. So there are higher levels of that in Judaism. There's 12:31 some affinity with the ethnic marker, sort of maintaining sort of family connections. But you might say, "Well, sure, 12:38 you know, my family's Jewish and I'm Jewish, but I don't believe in God," and that makes total sense in some ways, you 12:44 know, that part of the religious beliefs don't make sense to you, but the cultural part does. Or you could be someone who 12:50 still finds meaning in the ritual, even though you don't necessarily believe in supernaturalism. Or if we want to move it 12:58 outside of the example of Judaism, the Unitarians explicitly say you can be an 13:04 atheist and agnostic and come here, and so in those cases, people may be non-theist but religiously affiliated 13:10 and maybe actually active, you know, at going to their congregation. So we allow for that sort of diversity.and maybe actually actively going to their congregation, so we allow for that sort of diversity to happen. We don't push those people out. Like if you say, "I'm an agnostic, but I'm still affiliated," we don't say, "Oh, okay, you're religious." We still include you as part of our study. But those things actually deserve attention on their own. A specified study of affiliated non-theists is worth doing. 

Right. So I don't think it will come as any surprise to people listening that the rate of secularism seems to have been increasing in the United States over the past--I'm not exactly sure the timeframe--but certainly over the past 10 years. Since 1990 is when the uptick goes. And what do you see as driving that trend? 

Short answer: politics, but also different views of organized religion across generations. So, those two things are...14:12 - "related" should be "alright"

14:18 - "so the" should be removed

14:24 - "increase" should be "trend"

14:29 - "you" should be "one"

14:35 - "know" should be removed

14:41 - "they" should be "and"

14:47 - "pretty" should be removed and "stable" should be after "7%"

14:53 - "u.s." should be "US"

15:00 - "but then" should be removed and "However" should be the new beginning

15:06 - "pretty steadily" should be "steadily"

The corrected transcript:

14:12 - Alright, let me back up and say that...

14:18 - ...to give the description of the trend in the General Social Survey.

14:24 - Started in 1973, they've asked the same question about religion since they started which is, "What is your religious preference?" and then they give you Protestant, Catholic, Jewish, other, and one can fill in what other and none.

14:29 - They asked the question the same way when they started in the 70s. One would get 6 to 7 percent of Americans who said none. That was stable until 1990. It was still 7%.

14:47 - However, in 1991, the percentage of people saying no religion started to go up and it has continued to go up steadily from 1991 until the present day.Continues to go up pretty steadily from 91 until the present day, till the point 15:11 where now, latest surveys will say 23-24 percent of Americans say they have no religion. Now, I'm a sociologist of religion and that is a radical transformation of the religious marketplace, if you want to call it that, in a short amount of time to have the percentage of people say they have no religion triple in 20 years. It's fairly astounding. So then, okay, what's happening and we try to pull that apart, and one of the main things is that most of those people are not atheist or agnostic. Most of them fall into that other category that non-affiliated believers are saying "none," but they're maintaining some type of theism. So that's one thing, is that it's not all moving into what we typically think of as your standard sort of secular individual, they're kind of in between, mostly there's no organized religion, more than coming theist, correct. So that's the distinction.time progressed, there was an increasing emphasis on politics within organized religion, particularly on social issues such as abortion and gay marriage. This turned off some people who didn't want to mix religion and politics and led to a decline in religious affiliation among younger generations.

So basically, there's a shift away from traditional organized religion and towards individualism and personal spirituality. This doesn't necessarily mean people are becoming less spiritual, but they're rejecting the rigid structure and political entanglements of organized religion.A lot of those southern evangelicals are moving from, you know, Democrat to Republican, but as that period of consolidation occurred from 1979 to the early 90s, as that occurred, then there'd be afterwards, there was sort of a reaction by moderates and liberals. So, people who might have been nominally religious before and said, "Yeah, you know, I'm culturally Catholic or something," now might look at sort of what religion is, and its political meaning has changed. And so on TV, and hearing people talk about it, you hear like to be religious as to be, you know, against gay marriage, anti-abortion, and to be all these things. And people would look at that and think, "Well, that's not me. If that's what it means to be religious, then, like, I'm not." Yeah, right. So, in some sense, it's people who probably weren't deeply embedded to begin with. And so, there's kind of a move away from it as it's like, that's not that doesn't represent me. And then, you also have the children of people from that era growing up who have radically different views of specifically sexuality and also things.18:08: "Like premarital sex, same-sex relations, and also things like pot use, and so,"

18:15: "Younger generations are liberal on that stuff, and it does not jive with the religious right, and so even kids who are raised inside of the religious right, once they come of age, have now (are) more likely to drop out. And so what's driving the uptick is a rise in what we call the apostasy rate, which might be- we don't mean it pejoratively, how (you) know, it doesn't sound great, I guess is what it is. One of my colleagues says one person's apostate is another person's convert, but we mean it in the sense of you were raised inside of a religious tradition, and then you've dropped out. And so that has been on the increase, and that is what's driving that uptick, primarily the people who are dropping out are political moderates and liberals, and especially people of younger generations. So if you look at people under 35, the percent saying they have no religion is up around a third or higher. And so that's kind of- so we sort of make the answer that it's politics and then it's also generational shifts in attitudes."About politics and generational shifts in attitudes towards morality, those two things are obviously connected and that's the main driver that's led to this transition. What are some of the demographic traits associated with strong religious belief or affiliation? Well, there are a few different ones. Women are more likely to be religious, of various varieties basically, however you measure it, whether it's belief or practice. In the US, ethnic minorities are more likely to be religious, especially African Americans but also Hispanic Americans. So, there's some demographic patterns there. There's an interesting dynamic with education where higher education makes you more likely to be involved with a religious organization, but it also tends to drive down religious belief.20:12: "Supernaturalism" 

20:18: "...where like for instance a college degree makes you more likely to be a non-theist and it simultaneously makes you more likely to attend religious services, so it's doing both of those things at the same time. That's a... price, I, well, I didn't think of an explanation for that. Why do you have here? And there's the explanation as best I could give one. One is that higher education makes you more likely to be civically engaged in all types of civic organizations, including religious organizations. So, you're more likely to vote, you're more likely to be a member of the PTA, you're also more likely to be a member of a religious organization. Now, you may quietly be an agnostic while being a member of that religious organization, but so education has these kind of countervailing effects on that." 

21:03: "...there is a definitive age pattern to religiosity. Older people are more religious. And there's a life cycle pattern there where people are more..."Religiosity: older people are more religious, and there's a life cycle pattern there where people are more likely to drop out in their 20s and 30s, come back in midlife, and then especially in late life, they have much higher rates of religiosity. So those are kind of the standard ones. And now in the US, this is not a demographic factor, but a political identity: conservatives are much more religious, and liberals are much less likely to be pious in the traditional sense. Those are the basic ones. You did broach the liberal-conservative split and the way that the conservative party has used religion and politics, which is the so-called "God strategy." If you read that book, The God Strategy, it's a fabulous book about political rhetoric and the use of talk about religion in politics. It's about the GOP and the use of that language.22:12 - "Test this. If I can take surveys from the 50s and 60s, and if I have a measure-"  
22:17 - "Of political identity, it's basically uncorrelated with service attendance, how often you go to religious-"  
22:24 - "services. But now, it's strongly correlated with religious service attendance. And with the GSS, you can-"  
22:30 - "actually watch this correlation go up over time. So it's not an inevitable-"  
22:36 - "consequence. It is instead an outcome of a political strategy and political-"  
22:43 - "realignment. So it's not as if inevitably conservatives are more religious. It's-"  
22:48 - "an outcome of sort of the political machinations and strategies. Now, a few of-"  
22:56 - "the most high-profile secularists in, you know, recent years. It's the New Atheists. These are strongly, militantly-"  
23:02 - "atheists, as they're sometimes described. People like Chris Hitchens or Lawrence-"Atheists, as they're sometimes described, include people like Chris Hitchens or Lawrence Krauss, although I think he objects to the term himself, as sometimes lumped in with them. Dawkins on Dennis Bennett: "Yeah, do you think that, well, what do you think their effect on secularism, if any, has been?" 

"Well, there's a couple things there. I mean, certainly a lot of individuals do cite their reading of those texts as important in their own sort of conversion to non-theism, if you want to call it that, or their transition to non-theism. And they've sold millions of books, for sure. And it's fair to say, I think, that as you're saying, they're probably the most prominent public faces of secularism. And so, in some ways, they've kind of put secularism more in the public sphere. So there's more visibility for it. So those are..." (end of transcript)24:13 At least quasi-positive things, but to give a negative thing, I think there is.
24:19 Also now, sort of this perception, and it's always been there in some ways, the Dawkins style only reinforces it for people who already believe this, but to assume that all theists are the angry atheist, they hate all religious people, you know, and they're as prejudiced as anybody. And so I think while at the same time, it's been liberating for some people who have read those and found them to be insightful, that at the same time, it has not done any favors with trying to quell anti-atheist prejudice, which is a very real thing, right? I mean, this is if you look at, again, in the US surveys, groups who people say they dislike, atheists are at the top. It used to be that they were at the top alone, but now they're at the top relatively equally with Muslims. But anti-atheist prejudice is a real thing. I don't think people like Dawkins do any, I don't think they lessen that to any degree.The atheist prejudice is a real thing. I don't think people like Dawkins do anything to lessen that to any degree because if I'm a religious person and I listen to that rhetoric, I just kind of say, "Oh, that's what I thought it was." You know, it's just anti-religious and they think we're all stupid. And so in one way, you can see it as being beneficial for people and liberating for people who read it and feel like, "Okay, look, I'm not alone. There's somebody else who sees the world in this naturalistic way, and I can find my way in this." And so you can see the benefit there. But on the public level, I don't think the way they go about it is the best strategy for secularists to have a public voice. Now, people differ in this because this sort of the quote-unquote militant part of the movement would say, "No, no, we have to oppose superstition in all its forms and things like that." And I tend to come at it from a little bit more of a coalition-building perspective.26:16 - "reformed type thing" should be "reform type thing"
26:21 - "right" should be "together"
26:27 - "economic and racial justice" should be "social justice"
26:41 - "part" should be "but part"
26:46 - "people say it's been very positive for them so you can see that part of it" should be "people say it's been very positive for them, so you can see that, part of it."
26:53 - "public discourse part" should be "the effect on public discourse"
26:59 - "removing anybody stereotypes" should be "removing stereotypes of"
27:07 - "coalition approach to secularism in society" should be "coalition approach to secularism and society"
27:15 - "very much been pushing" should be "been actively promoting" 

Note: The transcript appears to be missing a question or prompt that the speaker is responding to in the last sentence.much been pushing, saying, you know, even having on their website things like "atheists welcome." Yeah, how's that working out for them actually? Quite well in this sense. Okay, so liberal Protestant groups, so Episcopalians, United Church of Christ, the PCUSA which are like the liberal Presbyterians, those groups are all fairly liberal on a lot of social economic justice issues, and a lot of times on gender and sexuality issues too. At the same time, the numbers of all those groups have been rapidly declining for the last 30 or 40 years. They've been hollowed out. And I could, you know, I work at the data archive. I can show you the numbers on these denominations. They're losing members. The UU are actually growing. So in some sense, they are staving off the decline that is hurting other liberal religious groups. I think through two things, by having a more inclusive approach that says Buddhists, fine, you can have a home here, atheists...28:22: "We're cool with that, you know what I mean? We're not going to hate on you if that's how you feel. And so they've sort of been a little more welcoming. It's a larger tent than you might get in other liberal religions. Still rely on supernaturalism and sort of traditionalism, or something. And the other thing that they've done positively is they have really high levels of civic engagement. So people who attend UU congregations tend to be involved in the community. They seem to volunteer for things, they vote, you know, they serve at soup kitchens. And so the UUs have been successful with having kind of this coalition approach and also pushing civic engagement to say that like liberal religion, if you want to call it that, or liberal philosophy or whatever, does not mean that you just get to sit at home and feel, you know, good about yourself. We expect you to go do something. And so if you compare them to other groups who have similar political views, they've done better. They've fared better than the groups who are staying." 

Note: The transcript seems to be complete and accurate. No corrections needed.Views they've done better, they've fared better than the groups who are staying within traditional Protestantism while trying to combine with some form of liberalism. Now, I mean, that's still a fairly small group overall in terms of like total population or something but, I mean, it's... so I gave a, you know, quote-unquote sermon for a UU congregation around here and I showed them some numbers on this to say, "Look, these other groups of the clock declining and here doing fairly well" and of course they were happy to see that. But I think a lot of it has to do with the combination of the coalition approach but also asking something of people. Right, to say that like, you know, civic engagement is the way to go, it's what we believe in, in getting a commitment. Once people feel committed to a cause through actual action, it's easier to bring them together as a community. And so, as a sociologist of religion, the liberal groups, the liberal...30:18 Protestant groups all have what we call in economics the free rider problem, which is like if I want to show up on Easter and Christmas, I will, and I know the Presbyterian folks will still be here and they'll have the ritual and everything, but they're not gonna come knocking on my door and be like "Where have you been?" You know, so they tend to have this thing where they don't require a lot of people to participate. And it's not that they explicitly say, "You have to volunteer seven times or something," but there is a culture of action and a culture of engagement that says, "Look, if you're gonna be in this group, this is what we're all gonna be doing." You know, and so I feel like they've been, and numbers show this, they've been more successful at trying to stay engaged and have their members engaged, whereas other liberal groups tend to be sort of plagued with weak members. Have you looked at how many of these explicitly secular or atheist kinds of groups have been faring these days?Members, have you looked at how many of these explicitly secular or atheist kinds of groups have been faring? Things like Sunday Assembly, though they have varying degrees of atheism, or Oasis. I think Oasis is another one. Some of these so-called secular churches, well secular churches are a specific, so I looked at some nonprofit groups like Secular Student Association and things like that. Now, those groups are all growing. They're growing quite rapidly. Now, the Sunday Assembly is a specific, it's, again, as you said, these church or whatever you want to call it, and that I know less about. But, a friend of mine at the University of Minnesota is a grad student there and she's doing her dissertation, it's an ethnography of the Sunday Assembly, Jackie Frost at Minnesota. So, I assume hopefully that'll be a book in the next few years and I've seen her work on that. So, it's really interesting in terms of how people are trying to form community and it's kind of a quasi, you know.32:16 - Congregational model, but also sort of removing some of the traditional sort of
32:23 - Structures of church and things like that. So most of those groups are like
32:31 - Secular Student Association is thriving. It's fair to say that [atheists] on Sundays is simply, I don't know their numbers. So in terms of
32:37 - Like, are they growing? I'm not really sure. They seem to be sustaining fairly well, and perhaps they're growing. I just don't know, right? But most secular organizations are doing well, and I would say better than they
32:50 - Were around 10 or 15 years ago. Better now than they were then. And so we profile like American Humanist
32:56 - Association, and that's true for them and so on. On the whole, they're doing well. But again, the biggest share of these people
33:03 - dropping out aren't explicitly saying, "I'm an atheist." So the biggest share of these people of the population are not
33:08 - affiliating with these groups. So they are growing, but at the same time, there's
33:13 - a large pool of people who are outside of organizations now. So it seems like...A large pool of people who are outside of organizations now, so it seems like there may be an increasing acceptance of non-believers in the U.S. Do you think that is true in the future? Like is that the way the trends are moving, barely yes. So again, GSS has asked questions like, would you be okay if an atheist taught college? Would you be okay if an atheist had their book in the library? And those things have been trending towards less prejudice, but not in a dramatic way. So, in a mild way, but I would say this: the more that people are open about being non-religious, which is certainly more prevalent now than it used to be, we would expect some of those prejudices to lessen, just by virtue of contact theory. So just like people coming out as gay, lesbian, bisexual.34:12 "Transgender has served in some ways to lessen that stigma if you look at public opinion polls because people now say instead of thinking 'Oh, I hate gay people,' they think 'Oh well, I know this person and they're actually a really good person and, you know, they're good to their partner and blah blah blah,' it sort of removes the ability to other somebody without thinking about it. So, to the extent that more people are open about it, and by virtue of that, more people know someone who's non-religious, and, you know, hopefully for the most part, they think of those people as, 'Well, there's still good upstanding citizens and things like that,' that should lessen the prejudice, and there has been evidence of that in other countries where there are higher levels of secularity. So, um, it's trending that way, but my caveat is that it's not trending in a really fast way, at least yet. But if more people are open about being outside..."35:13 - "...if more people are open about being outside of religion, I think you'll see some of that before we wrap up here. Have you..." 
35:20 - "...looked or, you know, research that's looked at countries where there's been forced atheism for secularism? And thinking like China, for instance, what's the situation there? Do people, are they crypto-religious? Or does the secularism actually take? You find higher levels of self-professed secularism?" 
35:47 - "You do find higher levels of self-professed secularism, but religion persists. So, there is good research on China. Thinking Yang is the leading scholar on that. He talks about, you know, like I think he calls them red, gray, and some other religious markets. So, there's kind of like some religions that you can do publicly, others are underground, but they've not been successful at driving..."36:09 "Out religion totally, the stuff I'm more familiar with, one of my mentors did has done a lot of research on Russia and he's got a great book called 'A Plot to Kill God' about sort of how the Russian Revolution essentially tried to extinguish religion and, you know, atheism with it. And how those efforts largely, in the long run, were not successful. Despite, you know, they continued and in some instances, you know, sort of horrific and tyrannical effort to do so. And once those restrictions were lifted, religion came back almost like, you know, you had covered this garden and suddenly showed it to the sunlight, and then it's like all the stuff just flowers now. Interestingly, Putin now is trying to co-opt the Orthodox Church and has done so reasonably successfully, which is, uh, qual my mentor argues is, frankly, what they should have done to begin with. Don't kill it, take it over."Paul, my mentor, Argos is right. Frankly, what they should have done to begin with is not kill religion but take it over. 37:15. If we're thinking strategically, but, yeah, so efforts at secularization, you do end up, if you're looking at an opinion survey, so if you look at the percentage of people who believe in God, 37:26, it'll be lower in Russia, China, and former communist countries. It will be lower, but there's also still a considerable amount of traditional religion, 37:32, and New Age forms of religion. It's like, I mean, it's one of those things that you can't kill. I mean, you can push it underground, but it'll find a way to persist, and people, if they want to believe in something or want to do something, they will sustain it. And so, 37:58, you know, for secularization, frankly, you're better off, if you want a secular country, you're better off, the way to do it is to have a good social safety net and have high levels of what we would call existential security, which means you38:13.38:13 - "have access to education, health, social services, the basic needs, and so the 
38:20 - places that are higher and those are where you find the highest levels of secularity. So if you want to scan on 
38:26 - European countries, you know that's where you find the highest level of non-theism. So, if you know, if you're imagining that 
38:33 - you're some, you know, ruler and your goal is secularity, then you should, like, social security and public education, you know? I mean, forget trying to kill the church. Right? There's, I mean, there is the idea that when you're in a country, when 
38:48 - you're living a life where your basic needs are not met or it's always a struggle and you know, desperate poverty 
38:56 - around you, you need religion. You need faith that there's good supernatural 
39:02 - power looking out for you. There's comfort in that kind of belief. So, that makes sense that in countries that 
39:07 - provide stable, you know, living situation, you are gonna have higher rates of 
39:13 - secularity. Yeah, and analyses at the spatial level bear this out. So, like for..."Specularity, yeah. And analyses at the spatial level bear this out. So, like for instance, just as a quantitative example, the highest correlation I get at the country level is if I go infant mortality, belief in God. So, the more life is in threat, the higher you expect theism to be. And this holds across countries globally and it holds inside of regions too. So, if I split the US up by county or by state and I look at levels of poverty and, you know, sort of death and despair, it correlates with theism and religiosity. So, that basic association holds pretty well across different regions. Now, it's not a perfect thing. It's not as if, you know, if you have perfect existential security, quote-unquote, you're... because you can't have it. You will die. So, it's like no matter what, you are not going to have perfect existential security. So, on some level, there's always a need for it, or there's always that level of it. And it's also not as if people in...40:21 In secure countries, there are secure places. They're all secular, some of them are still religious, and so there's some variation, but if you think of it as a verge, there's a huge difference between places where I might die today and that's every day versus places where, you know, I'm pretty secure, I know that if something happens to me, I've got access to healthcare and I know that I'm well taken care of. And so there are vast differences in population rates of religiosity in those places. 

40:52 So, last question, what are you currently working on? What's next for you? 

I... we are like 80% done with a book that I am lovingly calling "Sex, Drugs, and Bigfoot." Allow me to sell you. If that didn't sell you on it, allow me to sell you on it. It's basically, we're outlining a relatively parsimonious theory of deviance management, by which we mean, if you do something that is stigmatized by those around you, how do you cope with it? And you've got a couple, that there's a few."Something that is stigmatized by those around you. How do you cope with it? And you've got a couple, there's a few different options. If it's high, double I can hide, alright? So, you can apply this to, for example, secularism. If I'm an atheist, nobody has to know unless I tell them. So, I can pass, you know what I mean? Like, I just won't talk about it and it won't be a problem for me. So, you could hide, that's a strategy or coping strategy. Another coping strategy is to subset, to create a subculture. I'm gonna go join the atheist group and I'm only gonna be around people who are like me. That way, I don't have to deal with religious people so people who stigmatize me, they reject me, so I reject them and so I build my social networks around the subculture. A third option though is normalizing, where I say, "No, no. Like, I'm an open atheist and I'm gonna tell people about it, and if they want to stigmatize me, then I'm gonna try to explain to them why they should not." So, that's more of a-"42:24 Direct engagement. So now what we do is we take that, we kind of come up with 42:30 this strategy or this theory about who will use what strategy under what circumstance, and then we try to apply it 42:38 to three different subcultures. One is paranormalism, and it's got a heavy 42:44 emphasis on the Sasquatch on this one because we have lots of fieldwork with some different types of Bigfoot groups 42:50 - some who say, "Oh, it's an undiscovered animal, where scientists just like you," and some who say, "No, it's a psychic Sasquatch, and I've had communication with the spirit brothers, and they have, you know, brought me this form of enlightenment." And those are kind of like 43:03 the normalizing strategy and the outsider strategy, respectively. We have survey data, we have fieldwork on 43:10 that. Then we look at sexual and gender minorities, so anybody who says, "I'm LGBTQ," 43:17 and we look at specifically outsider strategies of queer movements 43:23 - where they're trying to say, "We don't, you know, why do we want to be part of gay marriage? Marriage is a…"they're trying to say, "We don't, you know, why do we want to be part of gay marriage? Marriage is a patriarchal institution. You've got to fight the power versus kind of an assimilation strategy that says we're just like you, we're family just like you." And so it's kind of the normalizing pattern, and the theory we come up with holds pretty well about who will pick what strategy, who will have what, and then the last one we look at is views of alcohol use, and specifically, the repeal of prohibition in the United States as an analogue to contemporary moves to normalize marijuana use. So basically, it's like, we have this theory, we lay out the theory in a few chapters, and then it's like application chapters, "Where does it apply in this circumstance? How does it apply in this circumstance?" It's a bit of a weird one because it's substantively kind of all over the map, but the theory is pretty concise. And so it's basically a theory book that's trying to do some application to show that, you know, we're not just making this up, and that it holds under these different circumstances.44:30 - [inaudible] circumstances right if there's actually an advantage to having such different circumstances because it means the theory applies more widely, correct? And it's more fun for us. And since then, I don't have to keep doing the same thing over and over for 10 years, which is frankly what I did for the secularism book, guys like all secularism all the time. Now it's like, okay, I can do the paranormalism thing for a bit. And then we just shift gears and I can do some historical work on the repeal of prohibition. It keeps me from getting bored.

44:48 - Okay, well, that's always a good goal.

45:07 - Well, listen, thanks so much for, for anyone who's scrambling to go pick up a copy of American Secularism after this. This is the book here. There's a lot of data in it, it's very interesting. I would recommend it to anyone. And thanks so much for joining us.

45:21 - Absolutely. Thanks for having me.

45:28 - Yeah, all right. Take care.

45:00- You keep me... keep me from getting bored.