to the Catholic faith and I'm interested to hear how that journey went so maybe we can start with that. 

0:04 "Hi Philip, how are you?"

0:10 "Great, how are you?"

0:16 "I am doing well. Thanks for joining me on Meaning of Life, sure."

0:23 "Happy to be here. Yeah, let me introduce us. I am Philip Menchaca and this is Meaning of Life TV, available as an audio and video podcast. And you are Sister Teresa of Mepkin Abbey, a professed religious sister with the Daughters of St. Paul and the author of the book The Prodigal You Love: Inviting Loved Ones Back to the Church. And I wanted to talk to you today about faith and atheism. And I think we'll probably get into the problem of suffering or the problem of evil, as it's sometimes called. And I'm particularly interested in your perspective because, like you, I was raised Catholic and like you, at one point, I became an atheist. And in fact, I still am. But you clearly have returned to the Catholic faith and I'm interested to hear how that journey went. So maybe we can start with that."Point: I became an atheist and, in fact, I still am. But you clearly have returned to the church. So, to start, I just want to talk about your religious upbringing and what that was like. Was your family highly observant?

They were. We were very, very Catholic. My dad has a PhD in theology, and so he worked for a Catholic University for a while, and then he worked for a diocese, and then he taught at secular colleges and community colleges. My mother stayed home for a lot of my childhood, and she really brought the Liturgy of the Church into the house. We just, you know, whatever was happening in church was happening in our house. We knew when Advent was, we knew when Lent was, and we knew when the Saints' feast days were. So, yeah, they were highly observant.2:06 "We were very, very faithful and, um, always on board without, are you, were you?" 

2:13 "Very faithful as a kid. Um, you know, my mom tells the story and I don't remember it, but she said that when I was younger, I was watching this TV show about the Gospel story and it was at the point of the crucifixion. And I was, probably, you know, I'm guessing, it was probably like four or five. And, um, Jesus is being crucified and the characters are crying. And she said I went up to the TV and I hugged the TV, and I said, 'Don't cry. It's because Jesus is dying for us. He's saving us, so this is a good thing.' So, I did have a strong faith. Um, my dad, he did an evangelism course. So he would, actually, this was very unusual for Catholics at the time, but he would actually go door to door knocking on people's doors and talking to them about Jesus. So I would always want to go with him."00:00 - actually go door to door knocking on people's doors and talking to them about Jesus so I would always want to go with him. I was really excited about that. But at the same time, I wasn't in my faith, and I had a relationship with God that I would say was pretty strong. But I also was a very skeptical child from the very beginning. Like, I remember the first time I had doubts that God existed, and I was five at the time. And I remember the moment is kind of emblazoned in my mind. I was just walking up the stairs, and all of a sudden, the thought occurred to me: what if God doesn't exist? 

00:51 - So, you know, to have that thought at five years old, I really couldn't cope with the implications of it at the time. It just kind of crumbled my world for a second, and then I just like put it back together. I was like, I'm just not gonna think about that, just keep going. Ya can't handle that right now. But I was that kind of kid, you know? I was always asking questions. My dad was a theologian.4:12: "So he was very educated and able to answer a lot of my questions, but I often was not satisfied with them. Um, a big one..."

4:21: "...that I always had was when Moses comes to, you know, first of all he's in the desert with these whining people for 40 years. He gets to the end of this long journey and God tells him to hit this rock because the people don't have water, and he tells him to hit it, I think, three times. And he hits it one too many times because he's really getting annoyed with these whining people. Can you understand, like 40 years? And so God says, 'You hit it too many times, you're not going into the Promised Land.' And I remember fighting with my dad about that, just, if God is like that, I don't believe in Him. Like, I would just... it was so upsetting to me that... that story, so... and that was, you know, that was me all the time. I was always arguing about everything and pushing back on everything, so that kind of... it."[00:00] Person 1: "I was always arguing about everything and pushing back on everything so that... so it kind of... it would... there was always a tension for me."

[00:15] Person 2: "Yeah, I mean I've certainly had similar feelings about stories in the Bible where there are stories... I mean Job, of course, is one of the classic ones and why would God inflict such suffering on him. Have you ever resolved that in your mind, some of these questions?"

[00:38] Person 1: "Yeah, you know, there are still things that I struggle with. Even after I came back to the church. I think one of them... I started going to Mass pretty regularly after I came back to the church, and one of the first stories is... and I'm forgetting her name, but her father promises God, 'if I win this battle I'll sacrifice to you the first person I see when I come back' and from the battle, and he wins the battle and his daughter comes out of the house."6:16 "and he sacrifices her and so this is, that this is that daily Mass and the", 

6:23 "priest [read?] the first reading so that was read and then the gospel, and the", 

6:29 "priest didn't say a word about it and afterwards he came out and there is", 

6:35 "hilarious because I waited for him, you know, like you're waiting for a rock star to exit the concert, and he comes out and I'm like 'Father how could you talk about that, why, like, how could that be okay?'", 

6:52 "and he gave me a really unsatisfactory answer and I remember walking away from that interaction feeling so frustrated. It was like my childhood all over again but it but it is different", 

7:06 "and I think it's only different through my more mature relationship with God. Not that I understand everything, but it's not as much of a struggle for me as."not that I understand everything but it's not as much of a struggle for me as 7:19 it was around the child. Yeah, so I mean, can you give an example? I mean, it might be kind of difficult to put into words, 7:31 but what do you mean by a more mature relationship with God? I mean, how does that manifest? Well, I mean, you are a sister, so one way it manifests, mm-hmm 7:49 it's just, it's just a phrase that's always sort of puzzled me because I have never felt, you know, I would go to church 7:57 when I was a kid. Oh my, we weren't an especially religious family, but we'd go every Sunday until probably, I don't know, probably, I was 12 or 13 when we started going less and less, but I've never, I've never felt that sort of relationship with God. So I hear people of faith often talk about having a relationship with God, but it's always been sort of an abstract concept to me.8:22 - "God and to me, I just don't quite understand what that means. Hmm, yeah, yeah. Um, I guess the best way to describe it is, you know, when I was an atheist, I struggled with, I [Music] struggled with spirituality and what I believed in. And, um, I started, you know, I wanted to be an educated atheist, so I started to study other religions. You know, I figured I knew enough about Christianity, I was a little arrogant, so I started to study Buddhism and other different things. But, I, so I was, I kind of started to make an intellectual journey towards believing in God while I was an atheist, and there were different steps in that journey that moved me. But I also had a conversion experience. You know, as that journey went along, it kind of culminated in the conversion experience, and that conversion experience was not an intellectual movement towards." [Ends abruptly]person and it just completely transformed my life so it was more of a relational experience than an intellectual one. 

[and that conversion experience was not an intellectual movement towards 9:39 believing in the existence of God because I kind of made steps as far as I could but the conversion experience was 9:47 in meeting a person and knowing that that... [inaudible due to low audio]... but in this conversion experience it... [inaudible due to low audio] ...and so 10:19 you know, just like Paul on the road to Damascus falls, falls down, he meets Jesus Christ and bam, his life is different. It was the same for me. Like, I knew a 10:29 person and so I started to relate to that person and dialogue with that...]10:34 And pray, you know, throughout the day, you just have, having conversations. 
10:41 It's like a friend, you know, and that relationship with some with but it's not a friend, it's not like another human being, it is being itself. 
10:53 And, you know, it's kind of amazing that being itself would, to me, kind of be in relationship with me, but it's kind of a sublime thing. 
11:01 But, but it kind of puts everything in perspective because the things that I don't understand, I can understand it in terms of my trust in this being. 
11:09 There's that relationship of trust that makes it impossible to have faith despite doubts. 
11:31 Okay, yeah, yeah. I think Kierkegaard describes it in Fear and Trembling, Abraham certainly had doubts.Kierkegaard describes in Fear and Trembling that Abraham certainly had doubts and did not understand what God was commanding him to do, but the fact that he trusted in God's power was what allowed him to move forward. Let's talk a little bit about your journey. How old were you when you realized you were an atheist? And how old were you when you announced it? These ages may or may not be the same, but I'm just curious. 
I was 14 when I realized I was an atheist, and I remember the moment was related to the problem of suffering. I was mulling it over in my mind while my parents were driving, and my family was facing a lot of suffering at the time.12:42 - At the time, and I remember thinking, "I just... I couldn't understand a God who would allow my family to suffer like this, especially when my family was trying so hard to serve Him." So it was really the problem of suffering, but also because my father worked so closely with the church, I kind of saw the underbelly of it. And I saw people behaving hypocritically, people being very un- Christian-like, people being much- I mean worse than uncharitable, just you know, really nasty things. And I remember thinking to myself, "It's very important to me to be a good and virtuous person. These people have basically devoted their lives to the church and they are not that. And so I think I can do this on my own. I think I can do a better job on my own, basically." So those were kind of some of the things that were going on.my own, basically, so those were some of the things that were going on (13:45) that pushed me into atheism. And I'm the kind of person that I don't (13:50) hide what's going on in my head, so my parents knew right away. I said, "I'm (13:57) me." And also, at the time, I was supposed to be confirmed. And so my parents said (14:03), "We're pushing and pushing me," and I said, "I don't believe in God. How can I be (14:08) confirmed if I don't believe in God?" So, yeah, it was pretty much (14:16) bam, bam. How did they react? (14:18) Um, they were - I mean, they were devastated (14:22), but I think they also realized that it wasn't something (14:29) that they could control. And I also said to them, "Also, go to Mass. I'll (14:34) still do whatever you want me to do because I'm under your roof, but I just want to be clear with you." Like, (14:40)14:40 I don't believe in God and I'm not gonna be confirmed. And so, yeah, they struggled with it, but I think they also, maybe thought that it was gonna be a little bit less of a thing, but it ended up being so. I think they were hoping, "Oh, this will be over pretty soon," and then it wasn't over, and then I think they started to get concerned.

15:08 How long did your atheism persist?

15:14 I was away from the church for about 12 years, and I was an atheist for most of that time.

15:25 At some point, did you start being a seeker, as they are called, someone who is searching out for different kinds of spiritualities, exploring?

15:32 Yeah, and I can't really, you know, I can't really say exactly when that started, and it's hard to say when you're, you know, 'cause for most of the time, I still didn't believe in God. I had...When you're, you know, 'cause, for most of the time, I still didn't believe in God. I had a thought that maybe there was something beyond the material, but I didn't believe in God until my conversion experience. So, it's hard to say when people ask, "How long exactly was your name pious?" I don't know. You know, it's kind of a strange question in a way because that's not really how beliefs or intellectual thinking works. Usually, there's not usually one moment. Conversion experiences might, you know, that's that's an exception. So, yeah, I did in college. I, in college, basically was interested in being an informed, yeah. I wouldn't have called myself a seeker, but I did go see a Buddhist monk speak once, and I remember being intrigued by his idea that desire is the source of suffering, and I remember being intrigued by his way of life.16:43 - So different things kind of intrigued me, but it wasn't enough for me to say that.
16:50 - I was even a seeker for spiritual when I left college. I was teaching in the inner city in Miami and I was in Teach for America.
17:01 - Ah, I was... oh yeah, where were you?
17:08 - I was in New York. Okay, yeah. So, as you know, Teach for America is very hard. It's a unique experience, barely, but, um, yeah. So, it was our- it was the first year that TFA was in Miami, so that's like another difficulty on top of difficulty. So, I was struggling a lot, so I remember it, and as a teacher, I was in a situation where I had to be a... had to be a better person than I was, like, my kids - I taught third grade - and my kids came...had to be a better person than I was. I taught third grade and my kids came from all kinds of different backgrounds that made them need more than a teacher from me. They needed a lot more attention and patience and love, and I just didn't have it. You know, I just lost my patience all the time. I remember thinking, "I need to be a better person, and I want to be a good person." I wanted to be who these kids need me to be, but I don't have it in me. I need to do some work on me. And so I started to meditate, and I started going to Quaker meetings every week. My college had been Quaker, so I kind of got introduced to that through my college. I still didn't believe in God, and honestly, quite a few of the people at the meeting probably didn't either. But it was kind of a time where I could just be in silence. It was non-dogmatic and nobody was trying to convert me, but it was just a quiet...18:53 - "time and so I, I, I would say that I started to kind of move towards the"
19:00 - "seeker during that time because I started to realize, on my whole quest"
19:05 - "to be a good person, I just don't have the resources within me to do it, to face"
19:10 - "these challenges without some kind of guidance. So I think that's what led me"
19:17 - "to start seeking, yeah. So when was your conversion experience? Was it"
19:23 - "after you had finished Teach for America? So Teach for America's two years and then, yeah. So then I moved to California, my"
19:31 - "boyfriend at the time was going to school there and getting his Ph.D. and so I was taking time off, too, before I"
19:38 - "went to law school. And so I applied to law schools and I started to travel. I"
19:44 - "went to Costa Rica and I was in this little, little rural town in Costa Rica"
19:50 - "where the roads get flooded in the fall and you're just like totally stranded. And but, um, there is a..."living in a difficult environment where they often face natural disasters like floods in the fall and may become stranded. However, in the middle of the town, there was an environmental learning cooperative that two Peace Corps volunteers had started. I volunteered with them and worked in the kitchen, carried firewood, worked in the garden, and lived with a local family. I remember being in the town and realizing that everyone there (except for the Westerners in their own little Enclave) had a strong faith. This was shocking to me because I had been out of that milieu for so long. I started to search for answers as to why they believed in God. I questioned if it was because they were poor and needed hope or because they faced difficult challenges due to their environment.20:55 - "uneducated, most of them who hadn't even gotten to high school. So, you know, if they had that chance of education that I did then they probably wouldn't believe in God. And as I went through-"

21:01 - "these answers in my head, I was thinking, 'Wow, I sound like such a jerk.' I was thinking, you know, and also, I'm not giving these people the credit that they deserve because as I got to know them and interact with them, I found that they were so grounded. That they had such a rootedness in them and in their lives. And the way that they interacted with me, just was really fascinating to me. And in my whole quest to be a good person, I was looking at them and thinking, they're good people, I like how did they become good people?"

21:47 - "So it was like, these uneducated poor people knew more about life than I did. They knew something that I didn't know. And so I remember one day I was-"his eyes I felt like he knew something that I didn't know. And so I remember one day, I was gardening and waiting, and this guy came up to me. He was the town drunk and he said, "Hey there, Teresa. Isn't it a beautiful day? Thank God for this beautiful day." And I looked up at him, and I'm very straightforward. I was like, "It's a beautiful day, but I don't have anybody to thank for it because I don't believe in God." And I remember he looked at me, kind of astounded. I think mostly because he probably never heard that before from anybody. Like he knew the other Westerners and they probably thought the same thing that they probably never told it to his face. But he didn't look upset at me at all, he just looked slightly amused. And as I looked into his eyes, I felt like he knew something that I didn't know.23:00 His eyes, I felt like I was looking at some kind of primordial being. I was 23:06 just thinking there was this wisdom in the town drunks that I didn't have. I 23:11 was like, how does he have this wisdom and how does he know something that I don't know? He didn't really say anything to me. He just said, "Okay, you know," and that was the end of the conversation. But there was 23:24 something in his eyes that kind of moved me. So, the people moved me and I think 23:30 that kind of prepared my heart for my conversion. And my conversion happened. I 23:36 was walking to the farm one day, and it was really early in the morning. And it's Costa Rica, so it's gorgeous and 23:43 beautiful, and the mountains were around me. And it was kind of like, what Chapo had said to me, "It's a beautiful day. Aren't you thankful?" And I felt this feeling of gratitude in my 23:56 heart for the beauty, and at the same time, there was a huge gust of wind. And I...Heart for the beauty and at the same time there was a huge gust of wind and I felt like one of the trees is gonna fall on me and kind of felt afraid. And so, I felt this mixture of fear and gratitude at the same time. And in that moment, God introduced himself to me and I knew that God existed, and that God wasn't just some impersonal force but it was a personal God. And that he loved me and that he had a plan for my life. And so after that, it was, I'm kind of a person of extremes, so I was on the plane ride home and I was like, "All right, I know God exists and he had a plan for my life. And I got into law school and that's my plan, that's not God's plan. And I'm not gonna go to law school and have a boyfriend, it was probably gonna marry, and then live with him for five years. But that's my plan, that's not God." But that's what happens when you, like, it's not just an intellectual movement.25:11: "it's a meeting, a person meeting like a personality, like a personal God who I... I"

25:20: "was in a relationship with, who I couldn't, like, I couldn't turn my back on... it. Yeah, like, I can turn my back on an idea, but I can't turn my back on a personal God. So, when did you decide to become a religious sister?"

25:41: "So, I didn't immediately go back to the church. In fact, I was really uninterested in becoming Catholic. But, I kind of slowly made my way back to the church, and that was only through my relationship with God. I'm chat with him every day, and I just...I felt like, you know, that's where He was moving me. Different, I would meet different people, and they would like talk to me about the Lord, or search effort. There was just different things that kind of moved me in that direction."

26:05: "Why were you not..."About the Lobos search effort, there were just different things that kind of moved me in that direction. Um, why were you not interested in going back to the Catholic Church?

I kind of felt like I've been there, done that. I also wasn't sold on Jesus. You know, I believed in God, but I wasn't totally sure I was Christian. At that point, it was just, I know God exists, and that's it. That's all I really know right now. So, it was hard to kind of figure out how or where I was gonna go. But now, it wasn't like it was just an intellectual journey. It was a journey with God, so I probably ended up coming to the Catholic Church so much faster than I would have if I hadn't thought about it a lot. Because even after joining, I still had many things I disagreed with. Um...27:18 "Intellectually it didn't make sense to me, now it does a lot more. But at first I was, it was very confusing to me. Not that God would lead me back to the Catholic Church, but I think a big part of it was also the Eucharist. I had a sense of God's presence in the Eucharist and I think that helped me to believe that God was present in the church. Yeah, so what is the process for becoming, well I was gonna say none, but I guess technically nuns are cloistered, right? Yeah, but what does that process look like? Um, basically you go through a time of discernment. And so, after I came back to the church, I felt God calling me to think about religious life. And again, I was like a wave, like you can forget-"to think about religious life and again I was like a wave like you can forget about it. But to see about doing that, my first response and probably my response for several years. But once you discern, you look at it, you can go visit different orders and there's thousands. It's really kind of overwhelming. There are a lot of religious orders around the country. I was in the Bay Area at the time, so I did a few orders in that area. And I ended up finding about the Daughters of St. Paul online, which is appropriate because they try to spread the word of God through modern media. So I was watching a YouTube video and someone mentioned it, so I ended up visiting them. And so really, you feel a call and then you have to kind of discern and mix that call: which order do I feel called to? What kind?29:12 If we call it a charism of the Holy Spirit, like, which charism do I feel 29:18 called to? What kind of work in the church do I feel called to? And then, and 29:23 then you apply, and they're 29:29 checking you out just as much as you're checking him out, just to make sure that it's a good fit, that it's 29:35 doing it for the right reasons. It's very important that there's a lot of freedom in this decision because it's 29:42 not something that you want to feel like your mom kind of pushed you in or 29:48 you know, whatever, or even, even um, a lack of freedom within yourself. The only like 29:54 God's calling you but you can't say no and that kind of thing. So yeah, and once 30:00 you're in, it's two years of, well, for our order, it varies, but two years of novitiate, two years of postulancy, 30:07 five years of temporary vows, which I'm in temporary vows, which that means thatFive years of temporary vows, which means that I take my vows a year at a time. So, I take a vow of chastity, poverty, and obedience for this year, and then I do it for the next year. And then after five years, I do it for the rest of my life. So, going back to the problem of suffering, how do you deal with that? Do you still struggle with that?
 
Yeah, um, every year we have a one-week silent retreat. And during that retreat, it's basically silent the entire time except for a meeting with your director and a mass and prayer. And I would say, every single year, I struggle with the problem of suffering. It's a problem. It's kind of the way my retreat.31:12 Every year, I'm like wrestling with it with God, and you know, one year, a 31:20 family friend's three-year-old drowned in their pool, and that's how I began my 31:26 retreat. It was just like, "God, why? How could you allow that to happen? You're all-powerful." So, definitely, I still struggle with it. I guess the 31:38 difference is that not that I have all the answers. I don't think there's 31:46 any intellectual answer that's completely satisfying, but I wrestle with it with God. I think one thing that I've come to is that God sees 32:00 things differently than we do, and one of the major things he sees differently is death, which is something that I've been32:08 meditating on a lot lately, especially. So, meditating on death 32:14 and the Christian view of death has helped me to see the problem of suffering or life differently, yeah.And the Christian view of death has helped me to see the problem of suffering or evil differently. Yeah, 32:20. That's something that I want to talk to you about because I know that you're a proponent of memento mori. Anyone who follows you on Twitter will know this. So I guess first we should just explain memento mori. It's an ancient tradition in the Church. I mean, it had its heyday in medieval times. Memento mori is the Latin phrase that means "remember that you'll die" or "remember your death". But it really has its roots in Scripture and in the Church. In Sirach chapter 7, verse 38, it says, "And whatever you do, remember your last days and you will never sin." There are several songs that mention thinking about eternity, and so it's really a practice that's rooted in Scripture. St. Benedict's 47th rule is to "keep death daily before your eyes." 33:10.33:17 Death is before you, so it's really something, but also stoic.
33:22 Philosophers, yeah, a lot of stoic certain momentum. It's very interesting, there's kind of a secular group of people who are into momentum Orion. Yeah, we have someone who contributes to the site, Massimo Pigliucci, who's one of the leaders in the stoic movement. And so, yeah, yeah so it's, I mean, it's an idea that anyone can really practice to meditate on your death and to think about it, to kind of put your life in the perspective of your death every single day. And so the way that I've done that is, I can show you the skull, mate. It's kind of, well, a little too much skull is to have a skull on my desk. And so every day, I look at that skull and I just think, "Okay, my day in the perspective of my death." And I have no idea when that's gonna be, because very often we like to think very idealistically about our death, like, "Oh, I'm gonna die when I'm 90, or when I'm 100."Death, and I have no idea when that's gonna be because very often we like to think very idealistically about our death like, "Oh, I'm gonna die of old age, I'm gonna be a hundred," but we never know when we're gonna die. It could be tomorrow, it could be in a couple of minutes. We have no idea when we're gonna die. So putting life in that perspective just changes everything. I mean, there are a few responses to that. You know, putting it into that perspective, if you could say, "Oh, you only live once, so let's just do whatever." There's that, the key to this response. Yeah, exactly. But the Christian response and, you know, I think the Stoic response too, would be to, "I want to live my life in the best way possible because I don't know when my death will be. And so, instead of kind of wasting my day or my time thinking about my life as far as my death, as far in the future, I'm gonna try to live well every minute." And that is like, that's a real discipline. I mean, ever since I started this practice, I.35:25 It's really become apparent to me how much time I waste and just how many things I do that if I really was gonna die tomorrow, I'm not so sure I'd be doing right, yeah. 
35:38 Yeah, I mean, it has a long history meditating on death. It has a long history in various religions. I know in Buddhism, for instance, there's certain meditations where you meditate on death and the body and the body rotting.
35:59 You've actually done Buddhist meditation. Is that right? You said you were interested in Buddhism.
36:06 I was, and I did. I did meditation. That, I don't know- I didn't- my western kind of curious- you know, western girl interested in Buddhism- kind of form of meditation. And that form of meditation I found very difficult, and I don't know if I was doing it wrong. Like everyone feels like they're doing it wrong. That's what everyone kept telling me, it's what everyone feels like they're doing wrong.Corrected transcript: 

Everyone feels like they're doing it wrong. That's what everyone kept telling me, is what everyone feels like. They're 36:31 doing it wrong. But I was, I think I was really, really pretty bad at it. I mean, I would always fall asleep. I kind 36:38 of be kind of be sitting next to my bed as early in the morning, and I'd find 36:43 myself on the floor. And I 36:52 would, you know, the whole idea of not kind of letting your thoughts will float 36:57 by, I just couldn't do that. It was a huge struggle for me. So, prayer, the Christian form of prayer, and we do have what is called meditation where but for 37:10 us, meditation is like meditating on the gospel. It's actually kind of chewing on it. You're actually like thinking 37:17 about it, an intellectual experience. 37:23 Like in the process of Alexia reading scripture, like the first part is kind of...37:28 "Intellectual and the meta Tatsu is yeah it's kind of chewing on it but it's also entering into it and you're, you're 37:34 praying with it but you can enter the scene and so it can be kind of imaginative too but then then the 37:43 part where your thoughts where, I guess it would be a little bit more similar it's contemplation where, but you're not 37:50 trying to control it, you just allow whatever is happening to happen. So I think that's what makes it easier for me 37:58 because I feel like I'm in a dialogue with someone. I'm not just kind of by 38:03 myself and so I'm dialoguing, and then and then 38:08 it goes to silence and and that silence just is natural. It's almost like you 38:15 know when you're with someone you love and you do, you just stop talking and and it's silent for a little while and and 38:23 that's just, it's just perfect, it's just more beautiful than when you were 38:28 talking, but you're still kind of communicating. So, um, I think for me that...[talking but you're still kind of communicating] [so um] I think for me that [silence is different] because I'm still communicating with [someone], so do [you think that] having gone through a loss of faith and then returned to the church makes it easier for you to [communicate with people] who are atheist or agnostic or struggling with faith [?]

[I hope so], and that was a subject of [your book] correct?

[Yeah], [um] so I wrote a book called ["The Prodigal You Love: Inviting Loved Ones Back to the Church"] and the reason I wrote it was because [our sisters run bookstores] and so when I [entered the convent] I was working in these bookstores, and any priest or nun will tell you that [a big prayer request] that we receive is [pray for my son or daughter who is away from this church], which is natural because [a lot of people are leaving the church]. [So] oftentimes I would kind of share my story with people.39:37 - Or, I try to give them a little bit of advice if I felt like they needed it. 
39:42 - In some cases, you know, one lady told me, "I tell him, I say, he's gonna go to hell every single day," and I was looking at her to see if there is any sort of self-awareness. 
39:53 - And I remember thinking, you know, there might be some people out there who are really struggling with this and struggling with how to like... 
40:09 - Some people of faith just don't understand what it's like to doubt. They don't understand what it's like to be, to feel skeptical. And I, you have to understand that the thing is... 
40:22 - The woman I entered the convent with, she said one time to me, "You know, I don't think I've ever doubted that God existed." And I looked at her and I said, "You haven't thought about it or not like..." 
40:34 - "... I'm a people of faith who say that they don't have doubts, I just haven't thought."I'm a person of faith who doesn't say that they don't have doubts, I just haven't thought about it enough. And simple, you know. One of the things I talk about in my book is, if you're a person of faith and you're trying to invite people back to the church, you have to get in touch with your doubts. You have to wrestle with them, you have to understand what the other person is going through so that you can relate to them in a way that doesn't come across as patronizing and arrogant. Yeah, well, we should probably wrap up, but this has really been a delightful conversation. And I just have one last question, just to satisfy my curiosity. Your name, Labia, is that Greek for truth, is that right?

Mm-hmm, yeah. So that's my religious name. When we take our vows for the first time, we choose a religious name. And I had been thinking about Veritas, the Latin word for truth, but I wanted truth because...41:36 Well first of all, the Daughters of St. Paul have a devotion to Jesus, the Way, the Truth, and the Life. But for me, I felt like I had been seeking truth my whole life. Like I was thirsty for it my whole life. I've always been fighting to understand and to grasp the truth. And what I've realized is that the truth is a person. And so, while I was pursuing that truth, in fact, He was pursuing me. So that's why I chose that name. Not... 

41:54 ...it also, I suppose, explains your Twitter handle, huh? 
Yep, yeah, it's Pursued by Truth, right exactly. 

And is there any other place that people can find information about the Daughters of St. Paul or anything that you write? 
Our website is Pauline.org, and I write for a Latina org, which is appropriate but it spells a little bit differently as a La-Te-Í-a, and la Le-ITI-a.[00:00] appropriate but it smells a little bit differently as a le
[00:08] Atia and la le ITI a
[00:17] 42:47no 8l e te IA there we go yeah okay
[00:24] 42:54great well thank you very much for taking the time to talk with me I greatly enjoyed our conversation yeah
[00:31] thank you for inviting me you're gonna take care