0:00 Hi Eva. Hey there, and welcome to Bloggingheads. Thank you so much for having me.
0:06 Yes, thank you very much for being here. Let me introduce ourselves. I am Philip Menchaca, editor at Bloggingheads TV, and you are Eva Galperin, director of cybersecurity for the Electronic Frontier Foundation. That's right. And we are going to talk today about privacy and security generally, and specifically talk a little bit about net neutrality and maybe some state-sponsored malware issues. But first, can you just tell me what the EFF does?
0:40 Sure. EFF stands for Electronic Frontier Foundation. We are a digital civil liberties organization that has been around since 1990, and our job is to make sure that when you go online, your rights come with you. 
0:55 So what are some of the current projects that EFF is engaged in?
1:03 Well, the EFF is currently a vast undertaking, so there are a lot of us working on different things. But one of the most interesting things about our approach is that we have this sort of unique combination of tools and skills that we can bring to the table, sort of like the Justice League. So sometimes the problems that face the internet require a lawyer, and then we file lawsuits. We do what's called impact litigation, so we file a lawsuit with the intention of getting a ruling that will impact people further down the line. This is a lot of the kind of thing that the ACLU does for civil liberties, both online andPeople further down the line, this is a lot of the kind of thing that the ACLU does for civil liberties both online and offline. We also have activists for when you need to get people out onto the streets, when you need people to sign petitions, when you need people to write letters or call their senators or congressmen. And we also have a bunch of engineers, and what our engineers do is sometimes they build tools like the Chrome extensions that we run like HTTPS Everywhere and Privacy Badger. We're also part of the group that works on Certbot, she's also known as Let's Encrypt, making it really easy for people to get free SSL certificates for their websites. And we also do research into the kinds of problems that people, and especially vulnerable populations have, so we have a website called Surveillance Self-Defense, which is our privacy and security guide, and we go around doing trainings. We also do reports on dangers to privacy and security online to vulnerable populations, including state-sponsored malware, which is a fairly large part of my work, and we do policy work around this sort of thing as well. So sometimes you have to go to the hill where you have to go to like the European Court of Human Rights and talk to them about why the Internet is important and why the kind of rights that you have offline should also be the kind of rights that you have online.Great, so you have a whole bunch of tools at your disposal at the EFF involved in a lot of different things. Actually, use some of the extensions such as Privacy Badgering and HTTPS Everywhere, which encrypts your access to certain websites when you browse online. So, I recommend people go and check out some of these resources and information that the EFF has. That's what the EFF does. To kick off our conversation here, I want to talk with you about an issue that's been in the news recently. Again, it's sort of a slow-burning, actually, I think years-long issue now at this point, and that is net neutrality. And this is just to kind of set what the controversy is right now. The FCC is looking at repealing some...Obamacare..not Obamacare, some rules while it's also Obamacare, Obamacare, looking at repealing some rules that were put in place under Obama that protected net neutrality. But just to start off basic, can you define what people mean when they say net neutrality? 

Alright, so net neutrality is not a law like the law of gravity. It's sort of a principle that certain... (transcript ends abruptly)Lot like the law of gravity it's sort of a principle that certain companies and ISPs have abided by for many years. And the idea is that a packet is a packet is a packet, and what an ISP does is it moves packets and it treats all of those packets the same. And if you are going to one website, you should not be able to get better bandwidth than if you are going to some other website. And the reason why net neutrality is so important is because if you have this sort of pay-for-play system where people can pay for better treatment by ISPs or preferential treatment by ISPs for their bandwidth, then the companies with a lot of money and with pre-existing relationships with the ISPs or that are owned by the ISPs are at an unfair advantage. And new companies that have new ideas and new services that are up-and-coming or startups are at a disadvantage. So this would have a tremendously chilling effect on startups and anybody who doesn't necessarily have a lot of money from the very beginning. So these rules were put in place under Obama to kind of keep an even playing field, is that correct? Mm-hmm. Yes, so particular companies couldn't pay.6:19 "Say Verizon to boost their speed or...or"
6:24 "Not throttle the speed of their website"
6:30 "So I guess the worry here is that for instance a company like Verizon, or Comcast who is an Internet service provider and provides Internet to people... (music plays in the background)"
6:47 "Could selectively choose which websites run well on your browser. Was that accurate? Yes, absolutely."
7:00 "Yeah, and for a very long time... for a very long time, EFF's position on net neutrality could best be described by teams of like Jesuit priests. It was so complicated. And part of the reason for this is because EFF has a lifelong aversion to regulation. We've been touched in a bad place by FCC regulation before and we don't necessarily want the FCC sticking their noses in our business because historically this has not been good for leveling the playing field or for increasing the competitiveness of startups or anything like that. The only reason why EFF really turned around on this issue and said fine, this is actually a situation where the FCC needs to get involved is..."Really turned around on this issue and said, "Fine, this is actually a situation where the FCC needs to get involved" [is] 7:55 because the ISPs themselves stated that it was their intention to do this and we think that this is tremendously bad for [a] competition, this is tremendously bad for innovation and it's very bad for [users, and it's our job to stand up for the users]. Yeah, so what can people do about helping preserve net neutrality? Well, there are a couple of things that you can do, but probably the most important is you can write to the FCC. The FCC is currently seeking comment on what people think about [their] rolling back their regulations, and you can find [a] on the EFF website there is a button on our home page you can press on that will allow you to contact the FCC and [let] them know what you think along with some suggested language that you absolutely don't have to stick to. We have also taken part in the joint letter that was just sent to the FCC written by 190 network engineers talking about why from a network standpoint, from a purely technical standpoint, net neutrality is really important and gutting it is not a good idea. [Okay great.] And there was a big push, I think was it last week, to try to put the word out about the FCC accepting comments? Do you have-- absolutely. You have to know what the outcome of that was, I mean, in terms of participation? I do know that the participation is very high.9:30: I don't have any exact numbers there. There is a long history, especially from 9:35 the last time that the net neutrality debate came out, of the comments crashing 9:41 the FCC website. Largely because while EF 9:48 F is able to move a lot of people to action, probably the biggest contributor 9:54 to this sort of pro-net neutrality speech, weirdly, has been John Oliver over 10:00 on HBO. And usually when he has an episode about net neutrality on his show, people respond in the kind of numbers 10:07 that ESF can only dream of. Yes, I believe he had he set up a website, "go FCC 10:16 yourself" dot com, I believe. Yes, that 10:22 would redirect you to the comments section on that on the FCC. There's also 10:30 been a really interesting trend of a box leaving anti-net neutrality comments. And 10:38 so it's really important to get real people coming to the site and giving their real views in order to balance out 10:45 this sort of astroturf thing that anti-net neutrality campaigners have 10:50 unleashed on the FCC website. That's very interesting. So, people have created, you know, automated spamming bots, I guess 10:58 to leave mmm the comments and, uh, in support or against net neutrality. Yeah, 11:05 it's an incredibly worrisome trend. Yeah, I hadn't heard that before.It's an incredibly worrisome trend. Yeah, I hadn't heard that before. That's the 11:11. That's unfortunate. So, the next thing to kind of switch gears, I know that one of your areas of expertise is state-sponsored malware. And so, I'd like to talk to you about that a little bit in the context of a recent story that has broken about it seems like the Mexican government's use of a particular kind of malware called Pegasus. It's a spyware. And for people who haven't heard of this, would you be able to give a recap of just a very broad overview of kind of what's happened here?

Alright, well, let's just start with what state-sponsored spyware is, right? So, I imagine that most of the people in your audience are familiar with spyware, but it can covertly load a program onto somebody's device, which could be, you know, their computer or their tablet or their phone, that gives you full control over that device. This allows you to see and log their keystrokes, take screenshots, make use of their microphone, make use of their camera. If you have full control over somebody's phone, that's tremendously powerful because you also get their GPS location at all times. It's essentially like putting a tracking device in somebody's pocket. You can also spy on all of their phone calls.12:46: "tremendously invasive" - now, spyware is  
12:52: pretty ubiquitous, it is available. It is possible to buy spyware for, you know, 40 or 50 euro online that has much of the same functionality as the stuff the governments buy. But when governments decide that they want to purchase and deploy spyware, generally, they don't show up and deploy a 50 euro copy of Jeb-rat. What they do is they either build the software themselves and this is particularly common in the Five Eyes countries. I don't know if your audience is familiar with who would qualify as Five Eyes but that would be America, Canada, the UK, New Zealand, and Australia, who all have a very close sort of surveillance community relationship because everybody speaks English. You also see this in Russia, in China, increasingly you see it in places like North Korea and Vietnam. So these guys roll their own, they have armies of trained professionals who build the spyware specifically so that it is very difficult for antivirus companies to find it. But countries that don't have this kind of money to pay tons of engineers to build them the custom software all the time sometimes go to third-party vendors and...them[00:00] 
The custom software is used all the time. Sometimes third-party vendors are used for this. These vendors include companies like FinFisher which is located, I believe in the UK and Germany, Italian companies like Hacking Team and also this company Dark Matter in the UAE and a company called NSO Group in Israel. NSO Group sold their software to a number of different nation-states and they insist that they only sell to nation-states. They tell the countries they're going to sell this incredibly powerful and intrusive software, but only on the condition that it's used against bad guys and terrorists. They have no way of knowing if this is going to happen, but that's what they say they do. So they went ahead and sold the software to Mexico and it turns out that various members of the Mexican government used it to spy on activists and scientists who were working to support a soda tax. Definitely not terrorism. Most recently, they discovered that among other things they were also spying on the children, lawyers and all kinds of other people who were related to the particular situation. Furthermore, they discovered that. [transcript ends abruptly]16:17 Someone in the Mexican government was also using this to spy on a panel that
16:22 was convened to look into the disappearance of 40 students in Mexico a couple of years ago. The disappearance of the students was a very big deal. It was a very large political issue. People went out onto the streets and they protested and marched for months, demanding that the government figure out what happened to these students. And it became this sort of symbol for how little control the federal government has over day-to-day life in Mexico and how little control they have over the cartels. So this independent panel was brought in to investigate, and it turns out the Mexican government was spying on them using NSA group's Pegasus software. So, again, not terrorists. What's particularly interesting about this was again, the NSO group said, "But we insist you only sell, oh we only sell to governments who tell us that they're going to use this to spy on just by on terrorists. How can we possibly know that they might misuse this?" It's like, well, maybe you might have wanted to read Citizen Lab's report from six months ago or Citizen Lab's report from eight months ago, or if you don't read Citizen Lab reports, perhaps the New York Times. It might- it's come up one searched twice, but you keep selling to these guys. And this is also true of some of the other really shady companies that...used in wars and conflicts, but also includes technology that can be used for surveillance and repression. So, this arrangement allows for countries to have guidelines on what kind of technology should be exported and to whom. Some of the guidelines include assessing the human rights situation in the country the technology is being exported to, ensuring that the technology is not used for repressive purposes, and ensuring that the technology is not diverted to third parties without authorization. However, the problem is that the guidelines are not legally binding and there have been cases where countries have still exported this kind of technology to authoritarian states, often without consequence. So, while export controls are important, there has to be more accountability and enforcement to ensure that this kind of technology is not used to violate human rights.19:28 - "used to make landmines and guns and tanks and then they expanded the language in the Wassenaar Arrangement to include a sort of surveillance software"

19:38 - "Unfortunately, the language was expanded in such a way that it could be used to sort of chill the kind of exactly the kind of research that unveiled these kinds of abuses in the first place, which I think is extremely alarming."

19:52 - "They would make it, this language could be used to make it much more difficult for me to do my job if I'm collaborating with people who are outside of the United States, which I frequently do."

20:10 - "Furthermore, the kind of software that is used in the building of surveillance not wear, or the analysis of surveillance not wear is the kind of software that gets used in all kinds of other things, and so this language is extremely problematic."

20:28 - "I don't think that the Wassenaar Arrangement or the export controls have, to this date, ever been used against surveillance researchers, but one of the things that EFF is extremely wary of is just leaving tools out there that could be used against surveillance researchers one day."

20:45 - "Saying 'oh, surely no one will misuse this stuff, it's going to be fine.' So we're extremely skeptical about this sort of thing, and in the meantime..." (recording ends)So we're extremely skeptical about this sort of thing and in the meantime, there's not a lot of evidence that the Wassenaar Arrangement has actually stopped companies from selling this kind of software to countries that then turn around and misuse it. And you can see that in the UAE and you can see it in Mexico. And more importantly, you can see it from a couple of years ago when a hacker who goes by the name of Phineas Fisher dumped emails full of one of these bad actor companies called Hacking Team. You can actually see their discussion of this new language in the Wassenaar Arrangement and they just go, "It doesn't stop them one bit. It doesn't prevent a single sale. It didn't even constitute a bump in the road for them. So this language doesn't work and it could potentially be used for a lot of bad things," which leaves us with the question of, "So what do we do?" So, we're not going to solve this problem by using export controls, and export controls are only seeming to make potentially matters worse for people like me. So how do we stop this? There are a couple of different ways. One of the things that EFF has done is we've caught the government spying on people inside the United States. We...22:22 - "had this case called Kidani versus Ethiopia in which it turns out that the"
22:27 - "Ethiopian government had installed surveillance malware on the computer"
22:33 - "of a guy living in Silver Springs Maryland. We know that they spied on his"
22:38 - "Google searches and on his Skype calls and this is a violation of the"
22:44 - "wiretapping statute in Maryland. So we went ahead and we sued. Unfortunately,"
22:51 - "this was not a case that we won. We actually got a really disappointing ruling where the judge refused to really"
22:59 - "work with the substantive issue. Like, he wouldn't even get into this whole idea that if foreign government wants to spy"
23:07 - "on Americans in America, they need to follow the law here. They need to get a"
23:12 - "warrant, they need to get an MLAT, they have to, they have to play by the rules. And what courts are really scared"
23:20 - "of, is that this will limit American ability to spy on people abroad, which is"
23:25 - "to say that other governments will say, 'Hey, you need to follow the law when you want to spy on people in our country.' We"
23:31 - "hear that they're tremendous fans of the rule of law, and we think that would be a fine idea."
23:36 - "I think Kidani versus Ethiopia will not be our last case in the matter. I'm still"
23:42 - "hopeful. We've got a few tricks left up ourselves. One thing I'm curious about actually is how you think the law"
23:49 - "has responded to some of these, you know, new questions brought by technology."Has responded to some of these, you know, new questions brought by technology. The law is an inner court system, they move slowly sometimes, and they're not necessarily the most adaptable institution. I think, do you think that's, I mean number one, do you think that's a fair assessment, and number two, are you seeing that play out in litigation that EFF has been involved in? Oh, that's the third. There are basically two reasons why the EFF does impact litigation. One of the reasons is that sometimes the law moves lags too far behind technology, and then you end up with these like really, really awful unforeseen impacts. The other is that sometimes the law is made by people who don't understand the technology, and that's why we have a whole staff of technologists whose job it is to go to people on the hill and explain the technology to them so that they don't make bad law in the first place or so that we're able to strike down bad law. Now, my personal favorite is when we can stop bad law before it happens, a better feeling. So, yeah, I think you've really got two problems there, and they're both things that EFF works on on the domestic front. I'm personally alarmed by the idea of government surveillance tools in the hands of the Trump administration. And so my question is, you know, is that is that.25:26 Fear justified, are we? It has the 25:32 administration taken any particular actions with regard to surveillance or privacy in the past six months that are 25:39 particularly concerning? Well, to begin with, EFF has been suing the US 25:49 government, or actually, we've been suing either the ISPs or the US 25:54 government over their over the NSA's warrantless surveillance since 2006. We 26:02 didn't like it when Bush was doing it, we didn't like it when Obama was doing it, and we don't like it when Trump is doing 26:08 it. I think that regardless of who is in power, warrantless wiretapping and 26:14 mass surveillance is not a good idea, and we oppose it absolutely no matter 26:21 who is in charge. I don't think that I've seen a lot of evidence that the Trump is noticeably worse than 26:28 Obama on this, but Obama was pretty bad. I think that there's a lot of 26:35 assumption that because EFF is viewed as a sort of left-leaning organization that 26:41 we automatically have just this love of the Obama administration. But we fight 26:47 for the users and we fight for civil liberties. We are on the side of civil liberties, and if you are on the wrong 26:52 side, we will come for you. So we've spent a lot of time criticizing the Obama administration for their lack of 26:58 transparency, all while billing themselves the most transparent administration ever.cornerstone of democracy. Just because you have nothing to hide now, does not mean that you won't in the future. Additionally, the government has a responsibility to respect the privacy of its citizens and not engage in surveillance without proper oversight and accountability. Trust is also an important factor, and if citizens feel that their government is spying on them without just cause, it erodes that trust and undermines the legitimacy of the government. So, while it may be tempting to believe that if you have nothing to hide, you have nothing to fear, it's important to consider the larger implications of unchecked government surveillance.28:33 Fundamental human right: the government does not have the right to come into your home without a warrant and look through your stuff. And we think that this also applies to the digital realm, especially when the information available about you when somebody searches the digital realm is so detailed and so incredibly personal. And so, that really speaks to the core of our mission. Furthermore, even if you feel like you don't have anything to hide, maybe all your doors are unlocked, and maybe you don't wear pants, and maybe you're just living life all out there in the open, not everyone is in a position to do that. The world is full of people who have things to hide, who are not up to no good. If you are, for example, a woman on the internet with opinions, let me tell you, you have things to hide because people will come after you and harass you. The same thing is true of Muslims and people of color. It's true of people with unpopular political opinions, and it's true of people with unpopular religious beliefs. And so, even if you feel like you don't have something to hide, it's really important to protect this right for these other people. I mean, for one thing, somewhere down the line, you could become one of them. Right? And then you would regret that potential stance that you had in the past once it begins detecting you. That's one day they're...the password that you use for that website they still can't get in because they don't have that second factor. And then finally, I strongly recommend using a virtual private network, or VPN, because that encrypts all of your online traffic and keeps it private from snooping eyes. Those are some basic steps that people can take, but there's a lot more information available on the Surveillance Self-Defense website.31:39: Your password and they try to log in with it, without that second code they're still not getting it and that is-
31:46: -fantastic protection that I think everybody should have. Yeah, any other particular behaviors that people should-
31:53: -be aware of when they're online or, you know, things they should do or not do when they're browsing, you know, Facebook-
32:00: -or wherever?
Well, I think everybody really has a different appetite for risk. Some people look at a roller coaster and they go, "There's no way I'm getting on that." And some people look at a roller coaster and they go, "This is a great time. I would like to spend all day riding roller coasters." And the Internet is really much the same. One of the things that I really would recommend is taking 32:24: a look at your sort of social media profiles and seeing what can be gleaned about you by a stranger. So, log out of Facebook and take a look at your Facebook profile and see whether or not you're giving away any information about yourself that you would really rather people did not know. And the same thing is true for, you know, Snapchat and Instagram and Twitter. Just get an idea of what a stranger can see about you and put together, and that's usually sort of the beginning of a risk assessment. What you do from there is really going to depend on your appetite for risk. 
Well, great. Yeah, I think we will leave it 33:08: there. I do encourage everyone to check out the work that EFF is doing, you know..."There, I do encourage everyone to check out the work that EFF is doing, you know. 33:14. I think it's very important. And thank you so much for coming, unblocking. 33:20. Heads, all right? Thank you, thank you." 1:16:26 NOW PLAYING. Section N.